OPEN

<!-- image -->

## Comparing mechanism-based and machine learning models for predicting the effects of glucose accessibility on tumor cell proliferation

Jianchen Yang ͷ , Jack Virostko ͸,͹,ͺ,ͻ , Junyan Liu ͷ , Angela M. Jarrett ͺ,ͻ , David A. Hormuth II ͺ,ͻ & Thomas E. Yankeelov ͷ,͸,͹,ͺ,ͻ,ͼ *

Glucose plays a central role in tumor metabolism and development and is a target for novel therapeutics. To characterize the response of cancer cells to blockade of glucose uptake, we collected time-resolved microscopy data to track the growth of MDA-MB-͸͹ͷ breast cancer cells. We then developed a mechanism-based, mathematical model to predict how a glucose transporter ȋGLUTͷȌ inhibitor ȋCytochalasin BȌ influences the growth of the MDA-MB-͸͹ͷ cells by limiting access to glucose. The model includes a parameter describing dose dependent inhibition to quantify both the total glucose level in the system and the glucose level accessible to the tumor cells. Four common machine learning models were also used to predict tumor cell growth. Both the mechanism-based and machine learning models were trained and validated, and the prediction error was evaluated by the coefficient of determination ȋ R ͸ Ȍ. The random forest model provided the highest accuracy predicting cell dynamics ȋ R ͸ = Ͷ.Ϳ͸Ȍ, followed by the decision tree ȋ R ͸ = Ͷ.;ͿȌ, k -nearest-neighbor regression ȋ R ͸ = Ͷ.;ͺȌ, mechanism-based ȋ R ͸ = Ͷ.ͽͽȌ, and linear regression model ȋ R ͸ = Ͷ.ͼͿȌ. Thus, the mechanismbased model has a predictive capability comparable to machine learning models with the added benefit of elucidating biological mechanisms.

/T\_he dysregulation of cellular energetics is one of the hallmarks of  cancer 1 . /T\_he altered metabolic activities (e.g., consumption and utilization of glucose by tumor cells), varying between aerobic glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation, demonstrates tumor cell adaptation to the microenvironment to ful/fill its need for energy and materials for  biosynthesis 1 . /T\_herefore, glucose plays a central role in driving tumor metabolism and development. Tumor cell proliferation in response to the availability of glucose has become an intense area of investigation to determine the underlying mechanisms of tumor cell metabolism and development, as well as identify potential therapeutic targets for altering the uptake and consumption of glucose. Targets of interest include (for example) glucose  transporters 2 , lactate  transporters 3 , and the enzymes hexokinase and pyruvate kinase of the glycolytic  pathway 4,5 . In the present study, we are particularly interested in the glucose transporters as they directly in/fluence intracellular glucose concentration which is the starting material for both glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation.

Mechanism-based mathematical models are playing an increasingly important role in cancer biology and oncology, as they can describe observations from experiments and clinical trials, provide predictions of tumor development and response to therapy, guide experimental design, identify new hypotheses, and optimize treatment   delivery 6-15 . /T\_here have been a number of attempts to construct models to simulate and understand the development of tumor subpopulations, the dynamics of extra- and intra-cellular nutrient concentrations, nutrient

ͷ Department of Biomedical Engineering, The University of Texas at Austin, ͷͶͽ W. Dean Keaton, BME Building, ͷ  University  Station,  CͶ;ͶͶ,  Austin,  TX  ͽ;ͽͷ͸,  USA. ͸ Department  of  Diagnostic  Medicine,  The  University  of Texas  at  Austin,  Austin, TX  ͽ;ͽͷ͸,  USA. ͹ Department of Oncology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX ͽ;ͽͷ͸, USA. ͺ Oden Institute for Computational Engineering and Sciences, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin,  TX  ͽ;ͽͷ͸,  USA. ͻ Livestrong  Cancer  Institutes,  The  University  of  Texas  at  Austin,  Austin,  TX  ͽ;ͽͷ͸, USA. ͼ Departments of Imaging Physics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX ͽͽͶ͹Ͷ, USA. * email: thomas.yankeelov@utexas.edu

glyph<c=25,font=/MPHSWU+Corbel>

demands during di/fferent stages of the cell cycle, and tumor-environment interactions. /T\_hese phenomena have been modelled with various approaches including ordinary di/fferential equations (ODEs) 16 , partial di/fferential equations (PDEs) 17-21 , agent-based  models 22 , and game theoretical  models 22-25 . While these approaches have provided theoretical insights into tumor metabolism via simulations, few direct calibrations of the models to experimental data have been performed, leaving them unvalidated and challenging to use for predictions. To begin to address this need, we  recently 26 simpli/fied the model developed by Mendoza-Juez et/uni00A0al. 16 to a smaller system with a limited number of (four) parameters that we were able to calibrate with time-resolved microscopy data, and then predict tumor cell growth by running the model forward in time. However, that model does not account for nutrient perturbations resulting from the application of nutrient transporter inhibitors; indeed, only a few e/fforts to account for such interventions have been attempted.

Roy and Finley et/uni00A0al. developed a system of ODEs to describe a metabolic network comprised of 53 enzymatic reactions involving 46  metabolites 28 . /T\_he model included 71 reaction rates to be calibrated within 46 ODEs with another 301 parameters assigned from the literature. /T\_hey employed the model to predict, in silico, the e/ffect of metabolic perturbations, including varying glucose availability or knockdown of glucose transporters, on cell proliferation. /T\_his allowed them to theoretically explore all the options of performing enzyme-encoding gene knockdown, inhibiting metabolism, and perturbating extracellular conditions to identify combinations that could inhibit cellular proliferation. /T\_he authors noted that exploring the space experimentally is prohibitive and speaks to the utility of this kind of modeling to identify testable hypotheses.

Cui et/uni00A0al. presented an early mathematical investigation on the e/ffect of a general inhibitor (e.g., immune system response, anti-cancer drugs, or radiation therapy) on tumor  growth 27 . A spherically symmetric tumor that included both nutrient species and inhibitor species was modeled and asymptotic behavior was theoretically determined. /T\_he results of the analysis indicated that reducing the nutrient level and increasing inhibitor level presented a similar e/ffect on the tumor's /final size. Many subsequent theoretical papers were built on this foundational study on the e/ffects of a nutrient inhibitor on tumor dynamics. Linking such modeling insights to experimental data is the next critical next step.

Complimentary to mathematical models that seek to explicitly incorporate the biology of the phenomena under investigation are data-driven models that seek to extract hidden patterns within large quantities of data. Without requiring speci/fic knowledge about the underlying biology, machine learning approaches can be applied when only incomplete or limited knowledge is available for a study. Many e/fforts have been made to study cancer metabolism applying either  unsupervised 29 or supervised  learning 30-32 on diverse data sources. For example, Eyassu and Angione performed principal component analysis (PCA) on data that described metabolites /flowing between glycolysis and the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle from di/fferent conditions to identify key reactions for the study of the pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH), an essential component involved in reprogramming of cancer metabolism 29 . Kim et/uni00A0al. built a random forest classi/fier to predict breast cancer metastasis using RNA-seq data with high  accuracy 31 . Katzir et/uni00A0al . integrated multi-omics (transcriptomics, proteomics, phosphoproteomics, and /fluxomics) data to predict which enzymes and pathways are regulated within the MCF-7 breast cancer cells via support vector machine (SVM)  classi/fication 30 . Gomez et/uni00A0al . combined several feature selection approaches and classi/fiers from machine learning on FDG-PET/CT (i.e., /fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/xray computed tomography) data to predict metabolism in response to treatment targeting metastatic breast cancer 32 . /T\_hese examples indicate that machine learning approaches can provide insights when a mechanistic understanding of cancer metabolism is not known.

In this contribution, we monitored the temporal dynamics of both the growth and death of breast cancer cells in/uni00A0vitro utilizing time-resolved microscopy, in a series of experiments involving di/fferent initial conditions (glucose concentrations and con/fluences), with or without applying an inhibitor of glucose uptake. A mechanismbased, mathematical model extended from our previous  work 26 was developed and calibrated to the live and dead cell counts to determine an inhibition constant dependent on the dose of the inhibitor. We then used the calibrated model to predict how a glucose uptake inhibitor in/fluences tumor cell growth by limiting glucose access. Finally, the accuracy of this mechanism-based model was compared to four common machine learning models to study the relative advantages and disadvantages of the two approaches to predictive modeling.

## Materials and methods

With the IncuCyte S3 live cell imaging system, we collected phase-contrast and red /fluorescent (excitation wavelength: 585/uni00A0nm and emission wavelength: 635/uni00A0nm) images of whole-wells every 3/uni00A0h for 4/uni00A0days. While details

Cell culture and treatment with glucose uptake inhibitor Cytochalasin B. We obtained the triple negative breast cancer cell line, MDA-MB-231 33 , from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Manassas, VA) and maintained them in culture according to manufacturer recommendations. We seeded the MDAMB-231 cells in ninety-six well-plates covering multiple initial con/fluences (30-90%) in Dulbecco's modi/fied eagle medium (DMEM without glucose, sodium pyruvate, HEPES, L-glutamine and phenol red, /T\_hermo Fisher Scienti/fic, Waltham, MA) the day prior to image acquisition began. /T\_he cells were incubated in the IncuCyte S3 live cell imaging system (Essen BioScience, Ann Arbor, MI) at 37/uni00A0°C for 4/uni00A0days, supplied with 5%  CO2 and air. Before image acquisition began, we changed the cell culture medium to DMEM with designated glucose (0.5/uni00A0mM, 1/uni00A0mM, 2/uni00A0mM, 5/uni00A0mM, and 10/uni00A0mM, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) and Cytochalasin B (0/uni00A0/uni03BCM, 2/uni00A0/uni03BCM, or 10/uni00A0 /uni03BCM, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) concentrations. (Cytochalasin B competitively inhibits the transport of glucose with high e/fficiency as a glucose uptake  inhibitor 34 .) A/f\_ter the medium change, we added Cytotox Red (Essen BioScience, Ann Arbor, MI) to the medium to monitor cell death. (Cytotox Red enters the cell plasma through the disintegrated membrane of dead cells and then binds to DNA to emit /fluorescent signals.) Analysis of the time-lapse /fluorescent images allowed the quanti/fication of cell death over time. We prepared four replicates for each initial condition.

Vol:.(1234567890)

are provided  elsewhere 26 , the salient features are as follows. A 4 × objective was used to image both channels. /T\_he whole-well images were acquired through stitching of multiple images collected by raster scanning across each well. /T\_his allows the tracking of both the total con/fluence (percentage of area covered by cells) and area covered by dead cells (labeled with Cytotox Red) during the entire experiment.

Image processing for cell segmentation. We used Matlab (/T\_he Mathworks, Inc., Natick, MA) to perform cell segmentation and generate the data for our modeling, including the time-resolved con/fluence curves from each well for both live and dead cells. Brie/fly, we masked the region of interest (ROI) and converted RGB (red, green, blue) images to grayscale for images from both channels. For phase-contrast images we binarized the image based on pixel-wise signal intensity. For /fluorescent images we applied a sliding block for edge detection and a Gaussian /filter for area smoothing then normalized and binarized the images. Complete details are provided in our previous  work 26 .

Mechanism-based model. We begin with the most parsimonious model selected from our previous study, which used a function of glucose level (details on model selection and derivation are provided in ref. 26 ) to model the temporal change of tumor cell number and extend it to include the e/ffect of treatment with Cytochalasin B. Our complete model is described by a series of coupled ODEs to calculate the number of live, N ( t ), and dead cells, D ( t ), at any given time point, t , as shown below:

(1) dN ( t ) dt = kpN ( t ) ( 1 -N ( t ) θ ) Sp ( Gacs ( t )) -kdN ( t ) Sd ( Gacs ( t )) -kbysN ( t ) ( D ( t ) D ( t ) + N ( t ) )

(2) dD ( t ) dt = kdN ( t ) Sd ( Gacs ( t )) + kbysN ( t ) ( D ( t ) D ( t ) + N ( t ) )

(3) dGtotal ( t ) dt = -vN ( t ) ( Gacs ( t ) Gacs ( t ) + G ∗ )

(4) Sd ( Gacs ( t )) = ( 1 -Gacs ( t ) Gacs ( t ) + G min ) tanh ( t )

(5) Sp ( Gacs ( t )) = 1 -( 1 -Gacs ( t ) Gacs ( t ) + G min ) tanh ( t )

(6) Gacs ( t ) = Gtotal ( t ) 1 1 + GinN ( t ) .

All model functions, variables, and parameters are described in Table/uni00A01. Additionally, the reader is encouraged to consult Figs./uni00A01 and S1 for a brief and detailed, respectively, overview of our approach.

As Cytochalasin B is a glucose uptake inhibitor, we introduced Gacs ( t ) to describe the glucose level accessible to cells (i.e., the e/ffective glucose concentration within the extracellular environment, due to the impact of the glucose uptake inhibitor) at time t , in comparison to Gtotal ( t ), which is the actual glucose level in the system (i.e., the extracellular glucose concentration) at time t . /T\_he three terms on the right-hand side of Eq./uni00A0(1) describe logistic tumor cell growth, tumor cell death induced by glucose depletion, and tumor cell death induced by the bystander   e/ffect 26,35,36 , respectively. Death can be induced in the remaining live cells with  factors 35,36 released by dead cells into the environment. We considered this phenomenon as a manifestation of the bystander e/ffect and included it in the  model 26 as cell death was consistently underestimated when only considering glucose depletion. Equation/uni00A0(2) describes the accumulation of dead cells from both sources of death (i.e., glucose depletion and the bystander e/ffect). Equation/uni00A0(3) describes the change of total glucose concentration due to the consumption

Table 1. /T\_he de/finitions, units, source, and value for the model parameters.

| Parameter   | De/finitions                        | Units              | Source                           | Value         |
|-------------|-------------------------------------|--------------------|----------------------------------|---------------|
| kp          | Proliferation rate                  | day -1             | Assigned from previous  study 26 | 0.14          |
| kd          | Death rate due to starvation        | day -1             | Assigned from previous  study 26 | 0.041         |
| kbys        | Death rate due to bystander e/ffect | day -1             | Calibrated                       | -             |
| θ           | Carrying capacity                   | Cells              | Assigned from  literature 33     | 8 ×  10 4     |
| v           | General glucose consumption         | mM·cell -1 ·day -1 | Assigned from previous  study 26 | 4.48 ×  10 -5 |
| G*          | Michaelis-Menten constant           | mM                 | Assigned from  literature 16     | 0.5           |
| Gmin        | Minimum glucose level for uptake    | mM                 | Assigned from  literature 16     | 0.01          |
| Gin         | inhibition constant                 | cell -1            | Calibrated                       | -             |

Vol.:(0123456789)

Figure/uni00A01. An overview of the approach used in the mechanism-based approach. /T\_he /figure shows the three main steps of calibration, validation, and prediction steps. Descriptions are shown in boxes and the associated equations are shown in ellipses next to each box. /T\_hese steps are referred to frequently in the Materials and Methods section.

<!-- image -->

by tumor cells as a function of accessible glucose concentration, which is the glucose level cells could actually utilize. Equations/uni00A0(4) and (5) are state functions, scaling the proliferation rate or glucose depletion induced death rate in real-time as a function of glucose level accessible to cells, where Gmin is minimal glucose level required to proliferate. Equation/uni00A0(6) describes the relationship between the accessible glucose concentration and total glucose concentration, where Gin is an inhibition constant dependent on the dose of Cytochalasin B. When there is no treatment, Gacs is equal to Gtotal and this extended model becomes the same as the baseline model. /T\_his formulation assumes Cytochalasin B only e/ffects the ability of tumor cells to access glucose, and does not directly inhibit glycolysis, pyruvate metabolism, or oxidative phosphorylation.

Machine learning models. /T\_he prediction of tumor cell growth can be formulated as a supervised learning task; that is, as a regression problem given a set of input features. In this study, we considered the number of both live and dead tumor cells at time zero (i.e., N ( t = 0)  and D ( t = 0)), initial glucose concentration (i.e., Gtotal ( t = 0)), Cytochalasin B dose, and the time of measurement as input features. /T\_he number of tumor cells at any given time point for both live and dead cells (i.e., N ( t ) and D ( t )) are the prediction targets.

All machine learning models were implemented in Jupyter Notebooks with the Python library Scikit-learn. To implement the models, the number of cells were /first normalized to a value between 0 and 1 (i.e., con/fluence) by scaling to the carrying capacity (Table/uni00A01). Splitting the timeseries data into a training and validation set requires special consideration to avoid data  leakage 51 (i.e., when future information is included in the training set, but similar data is not available when the model is used for prediction, resulting in unrealistically high performance in training and potentially poor generalization on unseen data). Our data was split into a training set containing 75% of the samples and a separate validation set containing the remaining 25% (more details can

We employed four commonly used machine learning algorithms: multivariate linear regression, k -nearestneighbor regression, decision tree regression, and random forest regression. Multivariate linear regression seeks to estimate the result of a variable of interest, using a number of explanatory  variables 37 . It is a parametric approach as it assumes a linear functional form mapping from the input variables to the output variable(s). While parametric approaches are generally easy to /fit with a small set of coe/fficients, they rely on a strong assumption about the form of the linear function, which may not always be correct. /T\_herefore, we also explored nonparametric approaches that do not assume an explicit functional form, thereby allowing greater /flexibility. /T\_he /first non-parametric approach we introduced was the k -nearest-neighbor   method 38,39 . /T\_his algorithm calculates a weighted average (equal to the inverse of the distance) of the k -nearest-neighbor as an estimate for numerical variables. While the non-parametric approaches are more /flexible, they can o/f\_ten be di/fficult to understand and interpret biologically. /T\_herefore, we included a decision tree regression  approach 40 , which takes observations about a sample (represented as the branches) to estimates of the target variable (represented as the leaves). Decisions trees are more straightforward to interpret as they follow simple decision rules constructed depending on the data features. Finally, we investigated random forest  regression 41,42 which is an ensemble learning method that trains multiple decision-tree models to achieve better performance in prediction compared to results from a single  model 43-45 . /T\_his algorithm employs bootstrap aggregating (or  bagging 46 ) to generate multiple random samples with replacement to train multiple decision trees and then uses the average prediction from each tree to yield a /final prediction. Random forest regression can correct for  over/fitting 47-49 resulting from a decision trees analysis 50 , but at the expense of a more di/fficult to interpret single decision tree.

Vol:.(1234567890)

be found in section "Training and validation"). Models were trained only on the training set to estimate model parameters. /T\_he trained model was then evaluated on the validation set. As our interest lies in comparing with the mechanism-based model, it is crucial to be consistent on the features we use, properties that we can measure or control in experiments. /T\_herefore, we only used the /five features described at the beginning of this section (i.e., N ( t = 0), D ( t = 0)), Gtotal ( t = 0), Cytochalasin B dose, and the time of measurement) and did not apply further feature selection or dimension reduction. Default hyperparameters as provided by the Scikit-learn library were used for these algorithms and no parameter tuning was performed, allowing us to evaluate their basic performance on our dataset and establish a baseline comparison with the mechanism-based model.

Model calibrations. /T\_hroughout the following section, the reader is encouraged to refer to Figs./uni00A01 and S1. Figure/uni00A01 provides an overview of the methodology used in the mechanism-based model, while Fig./uni00A0S1 provides a more detailed schema of the whole calibration and prediction process.

We used two datasets for our model calibration. Dataset A was obtained from our previous  work 26 and consists of 120 pairs of con/fluence time courses for live and dead cells from each sample. In Dataset A, the cells were seeded at low, intermediate, and high initial con/fluences with 10 initial glucose concentrations (0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.5, 0.8, 1, 2, 5, 8, and 10/uni00A0mM) and were not treated with Cytochalasin B. Dataset B was obtained from new experiments and consist of 180 pairs of con/fluence time courses for live and dead cells. In Dataset B, the cells were seeded at low, intermediate, and high initial con/fluences with /five initial glucose concentrations (0.5, 1, 2, 5, and 10/uni00A0mM). Of the 180 wells imaged, 60 wells were not treated, 60 wells were supplied with 2/uni00A0/uni03BCM Cytochalasin B, and 60 wells were supplied with 10/uni00A0/uni03BCM Cytochalasin B. In both datasets, there were four replicates for each initial condition. Note that for the mechanism-based model, the cell con/fluences (of both live and dead cells) are multiplied by the carrying capacity θ (i.e., the maximum number of cells that can physically /fit in the area, Table/uni00A01) and converted into the number of live and dead cells ( N ( t ) and D ( t ), respectively).

Calibration of the mechanism-based model with Dataset A. /T\_he model described in section "Mechanism-based model" (i.e., Eqs. (1)-(6)) was /first calibrated to experimental data (i.e., time-resolved measurements of tumor cell number for live and dead cells) from Dataset A, using the initial glucose level and con/fluence as the initial conditions (Fig./uni00A0S1, blue arrows, step 1). It was assumed (based on the results from previous  work 26 ) that the proliferation rate, kp , the consumption rate of glucose, v , and the glucose depletion induced death rate, kd , were characteristics of the cell line, while the bystander e/ffect induced death rate, kbys , was dependent on initial glucose level. /T\_herefore, we obtained estimates for three global parameters (i.e., a set of parameters shared and applicable across the entire dataset; kp , kd , and v ) and a local parameter (i.e., a parameter speci/fic for a given sample; kbys ) for each of the 120 time courses in Dataset A. /T\_he con/fidence intervals for all three parameters were also computed.

Establishing relationships between mechanism-based model parameters and initial glucose level. /T\_he estimates of kbys obtained from section "Calibration of the mechanism-based model with Dataset A" were /fit to Eq./uni00A0(7):

(7) kbys = kbys ,0 exp ( -α G 0 ) + β ,

where kbys,0 is the maximum kbys rate when there is su/fficient glucose, α represents the dependence on the initial glucose level, G0 represents the initial glucose level, and β represents a baseline o/ffset (Fig./uni00A0S1, orange arrows, step 2). /T\_his follows the approach developed in our previous  work 26 , assuming kbys presents an exponential decay depending on the initial glucose concentration. With the estimates of these three parameters, Eq./uni00A0(7) can be used to estimate kbys for a new initial condition (i.e., Dataset B) not contained in the training dataset (i.e., Dataset A). With new initial conditions from Dataset B, Eq./uni00A0(6) was used to represent the initial accessible glucose level Gacs,0 , and it is substituted for G0 in Eq./uni00A0(7). kbys is therefore represented as a function of Gin for each sample in Dataset B (Fig./uni00A0S1, green arrows, step 3).

Calibration of the mechanism-based model with Dataset B to reduce the parameter space for Gin . /T\_he model described in section "Mechanism-based model" was calibrated to experimental data (180 pairs of time-resolved measurements of tumor cell number for live and dead cells) from Dataset B, using the initial glucose level and con/fluence as the initial conditions (Fig./uni00A0S1, red arrows, step 4). In this calibration, the three global parameters kp , kd , and v , were replaced with the estimates from section "Calibration of the mechanism-based model with Dataset A", while the local parameter kbys was obtained from step 3 as described in section "Establishing relationships between mechanism-based model parameters and initial glucose level". In our modeling, we have the ability to model Gin as a global parameter (i.e., one value for all samples included in the experiments) or a local parameter (i.e., one value for each sample), or somewhere in between those two extremes. /T\_hrough our simulation experiments, we found having two values, one for each Cytochalasin B concentration, yielded the best model performance. With this approach we can avoid having too much /flexibility in the model and risk over/fitting, but also make sure the model is capable of capturing the trends apparent in the data. /T\_herefore, in step 3 we only estimate the inhibition constant Gin as a global parameter, assuming kbys still follows the patterns observed in our previous  study 26 ; i.e., kbys decreases with increasing initial glucose level following an exponential decay. We obtained an estimate of Gin for cells treated with 2/uni00A0/uni03BCM and 10/uni00A0/uni03BCM of Cytochalasin B, respectively, assuming the inhibition is dose dependent. In this step kbys was considered as a known parameter (/fixed for each sample, assigned with values from Eq./uni00A0(7)), instead of a free parameter that needs calibration, to reduce the model /flexibility and therefore the parameter space of Gin (i.e., to narrow down the potential values of Gin ). Con/fidence intervals of Gin were also obtained.

Vol.:(0123456789)

Calibration of the mechanism-based model with Dataset B to estimate kbys and Gin . /T\_he model described in section "Mechanism-based model" was calibrated to experimental data (180 pairs of time-resolved curves of tumor cell number for live and dead cells) from Dataset B, using the initial glucose level and con/fluence as the initial conditions (Fig./uni00A0S1, purple arrows, step 5). /T\_he three global parameters kp , kd , and v , were replaced with their estimates from section "Calibration of the mechanism-based model with Dataset A". However, as opposed to the approach described in section "Calibration of the mechanism-based model with Dataset B to reduce the parameter space for Gin", kbys was treated as a free local parameter and estimated together with the global parameter Gin , with the con/fidence intervals obtained from section "Calibration of the mechanism-based model with Dataset B to reduce the parameter space for Gin" serving as the bounds for estimating Gin .

Validation of the relation between local kbys and accessible glucose concentrations. /T\_he estimates of Gin obtained from the last calibration performed according to section "Calibration of the mechanism-based model with Dataset B to estimate kbys and Gin", along with the initial total glucose level Gtotal ( t = 0) and number of live cells N ( t = 0) were used to calculate the initial accessible glucose level Gacs ( t = 0) using Eq./uni00A0(6). /T\_he estimates of kbys as a local free parameter from the same calibration were compared to both Gtotal ( t = 0)  and Gacs ( t = 0) to determine if they follow an exponential decay as we discovered in our previous  work 26 . If the pattern is again observed, then the estimates of kbys were /fit to Eq./uni00A0(7) to update the estimates of kbys,0 , α , and β (Fig./uni00A0S1, brown arrows, step 6).

Evaluation of the performance of the mechanism-based model. We introduced /five criteria, namely the coef/ficient of determination ( R 2 ), mean percent error over the time course, percent error at the end of experiment, mean error over the time course, error at the end of experiment (more details on these errors are described in Table/uni00A0S1) to evaluate model performance and compare across di/fferent approaches.

Prediction with the mechanism-based model. Given new initial conditions of glucose level, con/fluence, and dose of Cytochalasin B, we can predict tumor cells with the calibrated model (Fig./uni00A0S1, cyan arrows, step 7). /T\_he initial accessible glucose level Gacs ( t = 0) can be calculated using Eq./uni00A0(6) and then used in Eq./uni00A0(7) to calculate kbys . With the initial con/fluence and initial accessible glucose level, we can solve Eqs. (1)-(6) to run the model forward and obtain time-resolved curves of live and dead tumor cells.

Validation of the accessible glucose level. We sought to validate the assumption that the glucose level accessible to the tumor cells was lower than the actual glucose level in the system, and then provide an estimate of the accessible glucose level for the cells treated with Cytochalasin B. To perform this test, we compared the con/fluence time courses of the tumor cells with di/fferent initial glucose levels but with no exposure to Cytochalasin B. /T\_he concordance correlation coe/fficient (CCC) was employed as a measurement of the agreement between the two sets of time-resolved curves. We hypothesized that cells growing in environments with similar glucose levels would present similar growth curves. /T\_herefore, we compared time-resolved cell number curves of tumor cells with treatment to time-resolved cell number curves of tumor cells without treatment and with similar initial con/fluences, but with di/fferent initial glucose levels. /T\_he growth curve without treatment that yielded the highest CCC when compared to the growth curve with treatment provided the best estimate of the accessible glucose level for the treated cells.

Training  and  validation. Training and test sets. /T\_he data set was randomly split into training (75%; n = 225) and validation sets (25%; n = 75). /T\_he training set was used to develop the predictive models and the testing set was used as an independent data set for model validation. /T\_he splitting for Datasets A and B was performed separately. /T\_he training set Atrain (75%; n = 90) and the validation set Avalid (25%; n = 30) were divided from Dataset A, while the training set Btrain (75%; n = 135) and the validation set Bvalid (25%; n = 45) were divided from Dataset B.

Training and validation for the mechanism-based model. /T\_he model described in section "Mechanism-based model" (Eqs. (1)-(6)) was calibrated to Atrain to obtain estimates for the global parameters kp , kd , and v, as well as estimates for the local parameter kbys via the approach described in section "Calibration of the mechanism-based model with Dataset A". /T\_he estimates of kbys were /fit to Eq./uni00A0 (7) with the associated initial glucose concentration from Atrain via the approach described in section "Establishing relationships between mechanism-based model parameters and initial glucose level" to yield estimates of kbys,0 , α , and β . Equations/uni00A0 (1)-(6) were /first calibrated to Btrain with the approach described in section "Calibration of the mechanism-based model with Dataset B to reduce the parameter space for Gin" to obtain a preliminary estimate of Gin with its con/fidence interval. Equations/uni00A0(1)-(6) were calibrated to Btrain again with the approach described in section "Calibration of the mechanism-based model with Dataset B to estimate kbys and Gin" to obtain estimates of both Gin , as a global parameter, and kbys , as a local parameter, with the con/fidence interval obtained from /first calibration serving as the bounds for estimating Gin . /T\_he estimates of kbys were /fit to Eq./uni00A0(7) to estimate kbys,0 , α , and β with the approach described in section "Validation of the relation between local kbys and accessible glucose concentrations". /T\_he initial conditions of each sample from Avalid and Bvalid were used in the forward model to predict the tumor cell growth over time with the approach described in section "Prediction with the mechanism-based model" and compared with the experimental measurements in dataset Avalid and Bvalid . /T\_he training and validation were repeated 50 times following the steps described above; a new random train-test split was performed each time to generate the data sets needed. Each time, we calculated the R 2 and errors listed in section "Evaluation of the

Vol:.(1234567890)

performance of the mechanism-based model" for model performance evaluation. We report the average model performance over the 50 rounds of training and validation.

Training and validation for machine learning models. /T\_he training and validation process were repeated 50 times. In each round, Atrain and Btrain (generated as described in section "Training and test sets") were combined as the training set for the machine learning models. Similarly, Avalid and Bvalid (generated as described in section "Training and validation for the mechanism-based model") were combined as the validation set for the machine learning models. In each round, each of the four machine learning models were trained on the combined training set. Predictions were obtained using the initial conditions in the combined validation set, a/f\_ter the machine learning models were trained. /T\_he predictions from the initial conditions given in the validation set were compared with the observations in the validation set. In each round, we calculated the coe/fficient of determination ( R 2 ) to for model performance evaluation. We report the average model performance (with 95% con/fidence interval) over 50 rounds of training and validation.

Learning curves for the machine learning models. For each round of training and validation, the impact from the size of the training set was studied. /T\_he four machine learning models were trained on training sets with size increasing from 5 to 100% (with a step size of 5%) of the complete training set (randomly selected) and the model performance on both training and validation sets were evaluated. /T\_his process was repeated for 50 rounds.

Statistical analysis. Tumor cell growth time courses were obtained from four experiments for each set of initial conditions, and each point in each time course consisted of a mean ± 95% con/fidence interval (a onesample Kolmogorov-Smirnov test con/firmed normality). Two -way ANOVA was used to compare the average number of live cells for each experiment at the end of day 4 between the groups with di/fferent initial conditions. A Student's t -test was used to test for the statistical di/fference of estimates for Gin between the two Cytochalasin B concentrations. One -way ANOVA was used to compare the performance ( R 2 ) of all /five models. /T\_he explicit error metrics used to evaluate the mechanism-based model performance can be found in Table/uni00A0S1. /T\_he CCC was used to measure the agreement between two time-resolved curves. Bonferroni correction was applied to control the family-wise error rate ('FWER') when comparing the performance between any two models, where each hypothesis is tested at a signi/ficance level of the selected alpha divided by the number of hypothesis tests to guarantee that the probability of having one or more false positives is less than alpha.

## Results

Observations of tumor cell growth from time-resolved microscopy. We present representative time-resolved con/fluence curves of live and dead cells (Fig./uni00A02A,E,I), along with a set of time-resolved images showing tumor cell growth and death on day 0 (Fig./uni00A02B,F,J), day 2 (Fig./uni00A02C,G,K), and day 4 (Fig./uni00A02D,H,L). /T\_he cells were untreated (Fig./uni00A02A-D), treated with 2/uni00A0/uni03BCM Cytochalasin B (Fig./uni00A02E-H), or treated with 10/uni00A0/uni03BCM Cytochalasin B (Fig./uni00A02I-L). Notice that the tumor cells in the /first row (untreated) expanded with minimum cell death (the con/fluence of dead cells increased by 4.1%) over 4/uni00A0days, while cells treated with Cytochalasin B (the second and third rows) expanded more slowly with more cell death (the con/fluence of dead cell increased by 9.9% and 15.4% for 2/uni00A0/uni03BCM and 10/uni00A0/uni03BCM of Cytochalasin B, respectively). Maximum cell death was observed for the highest dose. Observe how, in the third row, the con/fluence of dead cells at the end of experiment was 21.2% with the highest dose compared to 6.0% with no treatment and 13.4% with a lower dose.

Tumor cell growth with different initial conditions and treatment. Figure/uni00A03 displays time courses of the MDA-MB-231 cells with di/fferent initial con/fluences (i.e., seeding density) and glucose levels (0.5, 1, 2, 5, and 10/uni00A0mM). Samples with low initial con/fluence (Fig./uni00A03 /first row), intermediate initial con/fluence (Fig./uni00A03 second row), and high initial con/fluence (Fig./uni00A03 third row), are shown in separate rows. In each panel, the time courses of cells not treated with Cytochalasin B (blue), treated with 2/uni00A0/uni03BCM of Cytochalasin B (orange), and treated with 10/uni00A0 /uni03BCM of Cytochalasin B (green) are plotted. For each initial condition, the change (mean ± 95% con/fidence interval) on the number of live cells (as percentage) from day 0 to day 4 are shown in/uni00A0Table/uni00A02.

Cells that did not receive treatment displayed a negative percentage change in the number of live cells for high initial con/fluence (80.3 ± 1.7%) or low initial glucose concentration (0.5/uni00A0mM and 1/uni00A0mM) at the end of day 4. Conversely, positive percentage changes in the number of live cells were observed for cells with low initial con/fluence (45.5 ± 1.2%) and higher initial glucose concentration (2/uni00A0mM or higher), or cells with intermediate initial con/fluence (67.1 ± 0.2%) and higher initial glucose concentration (5/uni00A0mM or higher). Cells treated with Cytochalasin B, regardless of the initial glucose concentration or initial con/fluence, also showed a negative percentage change in the number of live cells. For cells with the same initial con/fluence and initial glucose concentration, those treated with a higher dose (10/uni00A0µM) displayed a higher percentage decrease in the number of live cells, in comparison to cells treated with a lower dose (2/uni00A0µM). For cells with the same initial con/fluence, the average number of live cells at the end of experiment was signi/ficantly di/fferent between the groups with di/fferent initial glucose level or treatment conditions (p < 1e - 4, two-way ANOVA).

Model calibrations. Estimates of inhibition constant for Cytochalasin B. By /fitting the experimental data (time-resolved curves of tumor cell number for both live and dead cells) to the model (i.e., Eqs. (1)-(6)) as described in section "Calibration of the mechanism-based model with Dataset B to estimate kbys and Gin", we estimated the inhibition constant Gin of Cytochalasin B at 3.02 ×  10 -4 cell -1 for 2/uni00A0/uni03BCM Cytochalasin B, and 4.55 ×  10 -4

Vol.:(0123456789)

Figure/uni00A02. Example images and con/fluence time courses of cells with and without treatment with Cytochalasin B. Panels A , E , and I present three example con/fluence time courses of live (blue line) and dead (orange) cells supplied with 5/uni00A0mM glucose without treatment, treatment with 2/uni00A0/uni03BCM of Cytochalasin B, and 10/uni00A0/uni03BCM of Cytochalasin B, respectively. /T\_he arrows indicate days 0, 2, and 4. /T\_he second (panels B , F , and J ), third (panels C , G , and K ), and last columns (panels D , H , and L ) show the merged images of phase-contrast image and /fluorescent image of cells on days 0, 2 and 4, respectively, with dead cells labeled by the Cytotox Red. In each row, the images of cell growth correspond to the con/fluence time course in the /first column; the color of the arrows and frames match the three time points selected. /T\_he con/fluence of live cells and dead cells are labeled in each image.

<!-- image -->

cell -1 for 10/uni00A0/uni03BCM Cytochalasin B, respectively. /T\_he inhibition constant for 2/uni00A0/uni03BCM Cytochalasin B was signi/ficantly lower than that for 10/uni00A0/uni03BCM Cytochalasin B (p < 0.05, Student's t -test).

Local kbys trends versus accessible glucose concentrations. As described in section "Calibration of the mechanism-based model with Dataset B to estimate kbys and Gin", the estimates of kbys as a free local parameter were obtained by /fitting the experimental data (time-resolved curves of tumor cell number for both live and dead cells) to the model (i.e., Eqs. (1)-(6)). With the estimates of the inhibition constant Gin reported in the previous section, the accessible initial glucose concentrations were calculated using Eq./uni00A0(6) given the initial con/fluence and initial total glucose level. /T\_he death rate due to the bystander e/ffect, kbys , was found to decrease as the total glucose level increased with a Pearson partial inverse correlation of -/uni00A00.41 (p < 1e-4). When we consider the accessible glucose level, kbys was found to decrease as the accessible initial glucose level increased (Fig./uni00A04B), with a partial correlation coe/fficient of -/uni00A00.73 (p < 1e - 4). We also con/firmed the relation between kbys and the accessible initial glucose level discovered in previous  work 26 (Fig./uni00A04A).

Fitting quality of the extended model. As described in section "Model calibrations", Eqs. (1) - (6) were /fit to the experimental data. /T\_he errors listed in section "Evaluation of the performance of the mechanism-based model" are reported in Table/uni00A03. /T\_he model was able to provide an accurate description of the time-resolved curves of live and dead tumor cell number across various initial conditions covering a wide range of glucose levels and seeding densities. Both the mean percent error over the entire experiment and the percent error at the end of experiment, were < 1% for both live and dead cells. Both the mean error over the entire experiment and error at the end of experiment, were < 0.3% for both live and dead cells. Example results of model /fittings to the measured data are shown in Fig./uni00A05.

Vol:.(1234567890)

Figure/uni00A03. Time courses of tumor cell con/fluence in media with varying initial conditions. In each row, cells were seeded at the same initial con/fluence (top row = low, middle row = intermediate, or bottom row = high). In each column, cells were supplied with the same initial glucose concentration (0.5, 1, 2, 5, or 10/uni00A0mM). In each panel, cells share the same initial con/fluence and glucose level while each color represents di/fferent treatments (blue: no treatment, orange: 2/uni00A0/uni03BCM Cytochalasin B, and green: 10/uni00A0/uni03BCM Cytochalasin B). /T\_hese time courses provide quantitative and dynamic data on the e/ffects of glucose accessibility (determined by the glucose level and the dose of Cytochalasin B) on tumor cell growth. /T\_he e/ffect of Cytochalasin B is quanti/fied by comparing the average percentage change in the number of live cells from day 0 to day 4.

<!-- image -->

Table 2. Average percent change of the number of live cells from day 0 to day 4. /T\_he results in all tables are shown as mean ± 95% con/fidence interval.

|                  |                         |                         | Initial glucose concentration (mM)   | Initial glucose concentration (mM)   | Initial glucose concentration (mM)   | Initial glucose concentration (mM)   | Initial glucose concentration (mM)   |
|------------------|-------------------------|-------------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|
| Dose (/uni03BCM) | Initial con/fluence (%) | Initial con/fluence (%) | 0.5                                  | 1                                    | 2                                    | 5                                    | 10                                   |
| 0                | Low                     | 45.5 ± 1.2              | -/uni00A052.0 ± 6.7                  | -/uni00A026.2 ± 4.4                  | 5.9 ± 6.2                            | 28.3 ± 5.8                           | 36.7 ± 4.7                           |
| 0                | Intermediate            | 67.1 ± 0.2              | -/uni00A034.1 ± 9.9                  | -/uni00A012.1 ± 9.2                  | -/uni00A09.6 ± 4.3                   | 10.2 ± 4.3                           | 9.5 ± 1.7                            |
| 0                | High                    | 80.3 ± 1.7              | -/uni00A036.0 ± 5.2                  | -/uni00A026.3 ± 9.7                  | -/uni00A015.4 ± 6.7                  | -/uni00A06.1 ± 7.0                   | -/uni00A04.7 ± 11.1                  |
| 2                | Low                     | 39.2 ± 0.8              | -/uni00A023.2 ± 2.0                  | -/uni00A016.1 ± 2.5                  | -/uni00A03.2 ± 0.8                   | -/uni00A07.6 ± 2.5                   | -/uni00A02.1 ± 4.3                   |
| 2                | Intermediate            | 66.3 ± 1.2              | -/uni00A034.3 ± 3.2                  | -/uni00A032.5 ± 4.4                  | -/uni00A028.2 ± 2.4                  | -/uni00A018.2 ± 1.8                  | -/uni00A019.4 ± 2.2                  |
| 2                | High                    | 75.9 ± 0.9              | -/uni00A036.6 ± 5.9                  | -/uni00A030.6 ± 3.6                  | -/uni00A027.8 ± 3.7                  | -/uni00A025.6 ± 1.8                  | -/uni00A026.5 ± 2.7                  |
| 10               | Low                     | 36.2 ± 0.8              | -/uni00A045.3 ± 3.5                  | -/uni00A039.2 ± 1.8                  | -/uni00A035.4 ± 4.9                  | -/uni00A033.9 ± 5.2                  | -/uni00A031.0 ± 6.9                  |
| 10               | Intermediate            | 65.3 ± 1.9              | -/uni00A043.8 ± 10.5                 | -/uni00A047.8 ± 5.4                  | -/uni00A040.4 ± 7.7                  | -/uni00A035.4 ± 5.1                  | -/uni00A034.6 ± 2.7                  |
| 10               | High                    | 78.6 ± 1.4              | -/uni00A048.9 ± 3.0                  | -/uni00A039.8 ± 4.5                  | -/uni00A040.3 ± 2.7                  | -/uni00A037.1 ± 2.3                  | -/uni00A040.1 ± 3.9                  |

Accessible glucose level. With the model calibrated, we were able to calculate the total glucose level in the system as well as the glucose level accessible to the tumor cells. /T\_he accessible glucose levels were reduced compared to the total glucose levels, depending on the administered dose of Cytochalasin B. We compared the di/fference between the total glucose level and the accessible glucose level over time (Fig./uni00A06). For cells with the same initial glucose level, the di/fferences were always higher in cells treated with the 10/uni00A0µM of Cytochalasin B compared to cells treated with 2/uni00A0µM of Cytochalasin B. For cells treated with the same dose, the di/fferences were always higher for cells with higher initial glucose level. /T\_he di/fferences decreased over time as the cells consume glucose. For cells treated with the higher dose, the di/fferences decreased at a lower rate. For example, the di/fference for cells

Vol.:(0123456789)

1.2

Figure/uni00A04. Relationship between bystander e/ffect death rate ( kbys ) and accessible initial glucose concentrations. Panel A presents our previous  /finding 1 on how kbys decreases with initial glucose level for the MDA-MB-231 line, with shaded area between solid purple curves showing the 95% con/fidence interval. /T\_he dark blue dots with error bars represent the average of estimates for kbys with 95% con/fidence interval, calibrated with the baseline model using Dataset A. Panel B present how kbys decreases with initial accessible glucose level for the MDA-MB-231 line, with shaded area between solid purple curves showing the 95% con/fidence interval. /T\_he dark blue dots with error bars represent the average of estimates for kbys with 95% con/fidence interval, calibrated with the extended model (i.e., Eqs. (1)-(7)) using Dataset A. /T\_he light blue (no treatment), orange (treated with 2/uni00A0/uni03BCM Cytochalasin B), and green (treated with 10/uni00A0/uni03BCM Cytochalasin B) dots with error bars represent the average of estimates for kbys (with 95% con/fidence intervals), calibrated with the extended model using Dataset B. /T\_he same pattern of kbys decreasing with increasing initial (accessible) glucose level was identi/fied. /T\_he /fitted curve in panels A and B , respectively, is used to assign kbys as a function of initial con/fluence and (accessible) glucose concentration.

<!-- image -->

Table 3. Summary of /fitting quality with the extended model (Eqs. (1)-(7)).

|                                    | Live        | Dead                 |
|------------------------------------|-------------|----------------------|
| Mean percent error                 | 0.25 ± 0.52 | -/uni00A00.38 ± 0.56 |
| Percent error at end of experiment | 0.90 ± 1.08 | -/uni00A00.65 ± 0.73 |
| Mean error                         | 0.09 ± 0.12 | -/uni00A00.08 ± 0.10 |
| Error at end of experiment         | 0.25 ± 0.14 | -/uni00A00.20 ± 0.13 |

with 10/uni00A0mM initial glucose and treated with 10/uni00A0µM Cytochalasin B decreased from 9.6 to 6.2/uni00A0mM, while cells with 10/uni00A0mM initial glucose and treated with 2/uni00A0µM Cytochalasin B decreased from 9.5 to 5.2/uni00A0mM.

Without a direct measurement of the accessible glucose level, we compared the con/fluence time courses of cells supplied with a high glucose level but treated with Cytochalasin B to cells supplied with di/fferent glucose levels but not treated with Cytochalasin B (Fig./uni00A07). /T\_he reported CCCs quantify the similarity between two con/fluence time courses. /T\_he con/fluence time courses of cells initially supplied with 10/uni00A0mM glucose and treated with 2/uni00A0/uni03BCM Cytochalasin B exhibit the highest CCC with cells initially suppled with 0.5/uni00A0mM glucose (CCC = 0.88) and cells supplied with 1/uni00A0mM glucose (CCC = 0.89). Conversely, cells supplied with 2/uni00A0mM and 10/uni00A0mM glucose had much lower CCC values (0.37 and 0.05, respectively). /T\_his suggests the accessible glucose level for cells supplied with 10/uni00A0mM glucose and treated with 2/uni00A0/uni03BCM Cytochalasin B was close to 1/uni00A0mM. /T\_he con/fluence time course of cells initially supplied with 10/uni00A0mM glucose and treated with 10/uni00A0/uni03BCM Cytochalasin B presents the highest CCC with cells suppled with 0.5/uni00A0mM glucose (CCC = 0.96). Conversely, cells initially supplied with 1/uni00A0mM, 2/uni00A0mM, and 10/uni00A0mM glucose present lower CCC values (0.71, 0.28, and 0.04, respectively) when compared to cells initially supplied with 0.5/uni00A0mM glucose. /T\_his suggested the accessible glucose level for cells supplied with 10/uni00A0mM glucose and treated with 10/uni00A0/uni03BCM Cytochalasin B was close to 0.5/uni00A0mM. Using this approach, we con/firmed that the accessible glucose level for cells treated with the 10/uni00A0/uni03BCM of Cytochalasin B was lower than cells treated with 2/uni00A0/uni03BCM of Cytochalasin B.

## Evaluation of the performance of the mechanism-based model through training and valida-

tion. Table/uni00A04 summarizes the model performance in the training stage. /T\_he average mean percent error over the entire experiment span, and the average percent error at the end of experiment for live cells were both < 3%. Although the average mean percent error over the entire experiment span, and the percent error at the end of experiment for dead cells were over 18%, the average mean errors over the entire experiment span and average error at the end of experiment for both live and dead cells were < 3.5%. /T\_his suggests the higher percent error

Vol:.(1234567890)

Figure/uni00A05. Model /fitting for MDA-MB-231 cells with di/fferent glucose levels and treatments. In each row, cells were supplied with the same initial glucose concentration (0.5, 1, 2, 5, or 10/uni00A0mM, respectively). In each column, the same treatment options were applied to the cells (no treatment, 2/uni00A0/uni03BCM Cytochalasin B, or 10/uni00A0/uni03BCM Cytochalasin B, respectively). In each panel, measured data are shown in dots with curves from the model shown as curves. /T\_he results for live cells and dead cells are shown in blue and orange, respectively. Our model is capable of capturing the di/fferent growth curves from di/fferent initial conditions with di/fferent treatments.

<!-- image -->

of dead cells can be explained by the small number of dead cells in comparison to the number of live cells; for example, an error of 1% in the con/fluence of dead cells would result in a 20% percent error for a sample with con/fluence of dead cells at 5%.

Table/uni00A05 reports the model performance in the validation stage. /T\_he average mean percent error over the entire experiment, and the average percent error at the end of experiment for live cells were both < 2.5%. Although the average mean percent error over the entire experiment, and the percent error at the end of experiment for dead cells were over 19%, the average mean error over the entire experiment and average error at the end of experiment for both live and dead cells were < 4.5% for both live and dead cells. Again, this indicates that the higher percent error of dead cells can be explained by the small number of dead cells in comparison to the number of live cells.

Comparison of model performance between mechanism-based and machine learning models. /T\_he coe/fficient of determination ( R 2 ) was used to compare the performance across the mechanism-based

Vol.:(0123456789)

Figure/uni00A06. Comparison of total and accessible glucose levels from model calibration. Panel A presents the change of glucose level over time for cells without treatment. In this case, the total glucose level is the same as the accessible glucose level. Panels B and C present the di/fferences between the total and accessible glucose levels for cells treated with 2/uni00A0/uni03BCM and 10/uni00A0/uni03BCM Cytochalasin B, respectively. In each panel, the same treatment options were applied, and cells supplied with di/fferent initial glucose levels (0.5, 1, 2, 5, and 10/uni00A0mM) are shown in di/fferent colors. /T\_he di/fferences decreased over time as the cells consume glucose. For cells treated with a higher dose, the di/fferences decreased at a lower rate.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

(days)

Figure/uni00A07. Comparison of con/fluence time courses between treated and untreated groups with di/fferent glucose levels. Panels A -D present the comparison of con/fluence time courses supplied with 10/uni00A0mM glucose and treated with 2/uni00A0/uni03BCM Cytochalasin B, and cells supplied with di/fferent glucose levels ( A 0.5/uni00A0mM, B 1/uni00A0mM, C 2/uni00A0mM, and D 10/uni00A0mM) and without treatment. Panels E -H present the comparison of con/fluence time courses of cells supplied with 10/uni00A0mM glucose and treated with 10/uni00A0/uni03BCM Cytochalasin B and cells supplied with di/fferent glucose levels ( E 0.5/uni00A0mM, F 1/uni00A0mM, G 2/uni00A0mM, and H 10/uni00A0mM) without treatment. In each panel, con/fluence time course of cells treated are shown in orange while con/fluence time course of cells without treatment are shown in blue. /T\_he more curves are aligned with each other, the higher their CCC. A high CCC between a treated and an untreated group suggests that the accessible glucose level in the treatment group is close to the glucose level in the untreated group.

<!-- image -->

model and four machine learning models. /T\_he results are shown in Table/uni00A06. /T\_he model performance for predicting live cells alone, dead cells alone, or both live and dead cells were compared. /T\_he R 2 value of the mechanism-based model calibrated on the training data set was 0.9627 ± 0.0000, while the values for the decision tree model, random forest model, k -nearest-neighbor regression model, and the linear regression model were 1.0000 ± 0.0000, 0.9991 ± 0.0000, 0.9283 ± 0.0014, and 0.7027 ± 0.0019, respectively. /T\_he random forest model performed the best at predicting tumor cell growth on the validation set with an R 2 of 0.9260 ± 0.0028, followed

<!-- image -->

Vol:.(1234567890)

Table 4. Summary of model calibration across 50 training sets.

|                                    | Live        | Dead         |
|------------------------------------|-------------|--------------|
| Mean percent error                 | 1.18 ± 0.15 | 18.13 ± 0.35 |
| Percent error at end of experiment | 2.78 ± 0.24 | 19.10 ± 1.05 |
| Mean error                         | 0.28 ± 0.08 | 0.83 ± 0.03  |
| Error at end of experiment         | 0.31 ± 0.09 | 3.28 ± 0.10  |

Table 5. Summary of prediction error across 50 rounds of training and validation.

|                                    | Live                 | Dead         |
|------------------------------------|----------------------|--------------|
| Mean percent error                 | 0.83 ± 0.22          | 19.81 ± 0.76 |
| Percent error at end of experiment | 2.00 ± 0.38          | 25.26 ± 2.04 |
| Mean error                         | 0.08 ± 0.10          | 0.81 ± 0.07  |
| Error at end of experiment         | -/uni00A00.20 ± 0.12 | 4.15 ± 0.18  |

Table 6. Comparison of performance between the mechanism-based and machine learning models.

| Model score ( R 2 )cs   | Model score ( R 2 )cs   | Mechanism-based   | Linear regression   | KNN regression   | Decision tree   |
|-------------------------|-------------------------|-------------------|---------------------|------------------|-----------------|
|                         | Live                    | 0.9750 ± 0.0000   | 0.7958 ± 0.0023     | 0.9179 ± 0.0017  | 1.0000 ± 0.0000 |
|                         | Dead                    | 0.9504 ± 0.0000   | 0.6097 ± 0.0026     | 0.9387 ± 0.0014  | 1.0000 ± 0.0000 |
|                         | Total                   | 0.9627 ± 0.0000   | 0.7027 ± 0.0019     | 0.9283 ± 0.0014  | 1.0000 ± 0.0000 |
|                         | Live                    | 0.8927 ± 0.0062   | 0.7843 ± 0.0079     | 0.8055 ± 0.0112  | 0.9146 ± 0.0042 |
|                         | Dead                    | 0.6466 ± 0.0212   | 0.5963 ± 0.0080     | 0.8761 ± 0.0065  | 0.8638 ± 0.0062 |
|                         | Total                   | 0.7696 ± 0.0130   | 0.6903 ± 0.0064     | 0.8408 ± 0.0075  | 0.8892 ± 0.0046 |

by the decision tree, k -nearest-neighbor regression, mechanism-based, and linear regression models with R 2 values of 0.8892 ± 0.0046, 0.8408 ± 0.0075, 0.7696 ± 0.0130, and 0.6903 ± 0.0064, respectively. /T\_he di/fferences of R 2 values from any two models are signi/ficant (p < 1e - 5, one-way ANOVA). Bonferroni correction was applied to control the family-wise error rate ('FWER'); since all comparisons showed p < 1e - 5, we could guarantee the probability of having one or more false positives is less 1e - 4. With this conservative Bonferroni correction, we conclude with con/fidence that the di/fference between any two models is signi/ficant. Figure/uni00A08 presents representative prediction results from the mechanism-based model and four machine learning models (Fig./uni00A08 /first three rows), as well as the scatter plot of prediction against measurement for each of the /five models (Fig./uni00A08 last row). /T\_he random forest model performed the best for both live and dead cells, regardless of whether the con/fluence was low, intermediate, or high. /T\_he mechanism-based model presented an intermediate performance compared to the other models, with higher error when the con/fluence was very low or very high.

Learning curves (Fig./uni00A09) were used to evaluate the performance of machine learning and check for potential over/fitting. When we increased the size of training set from 5 to 100% of the complete training set, the score on the validation set increased from 0.4863 ± 0.0849 to 0.6903 ± 0.0051 (+ 41.9%) for the Linear Regression model, from 0.2552 ± 0.0259 to 0.8408 ± 0.0061 (+ 229.5%) for the K-Nearest Neighbor regression model, from 0.4149 ± 0.0398 to 0.8892 ± 0.0037 (+ 114.3%) for the Decision Tree model, and from 0.5798 ± 0.0266 to 0.9260 ± 0.0023 (+ 59.7%) for the Random Forest model.

## Discussion

/T\_his study sought to extend the mathematical model we had previously  developed 26 that predicts tumor cell growth depending on the availability of glucose so we can apply it to investigate the e/ffects of interventions by study design to perturb glucose accessibility. Speci/fically, we applied Cytochalasin B, an inhibitor for glucose uptake, as the treatment to investigate. We targeted the uptake of glucose in an extension of our model to avoid further complicating the system with the mechanism describing glucose consumption post-treatment. To achieve this goal, we proposed to model the total glucose level in the system and the accessible glucose level to the tumor cells. We assumed the consumption of glucose and all the metabolism-related tumor cell growth only depends on the intracellular glucose availability and not the total glucose level in the environment. /T\_herefore, the accessible glucose level at time t , Gacs ( t ), replaced the glucose level at time t , G ( t ), in the original system of coupled ODEs. As a result, we needed an additional equation to relate the accessible and total glucose levels which we achieved by introducing an inhibition constant depending on the dose of the inhibitor. In the resulting (extended) model (i.e., Eqs. (1)-(7)), the proliferation rate, the glucose depletion induced death rate, the consumption rate of glucose, and the newly introduced inhibition constant were considered as global parameters, while the death

Vol.:(0123456789)

Figure/uni00A08. Model prediction with the mechanism-based and machine learning models. In each column, the results from the same model are shown. In the /first three rows, examples of the comparison between the experimental measurement and predicted con/fluence time course from each model are shown. In each of these three rows, measurement from the same well is used. Measurement from three wells with low (/first row), intermediate (second row), and high (third row) initial con/fluence were used as examples. In each panel, measured data are shown with dots, with live cells shown in blue and dead cells shown in orange; model predictions are shown as curves, with lives cells shown in blue and dead cells shown in orange. /T\_he bottom row shows scatter plots of prediction against measurement for every well from each of the /five models, with results for live cells shown blue and dead cells shown in orange. /T\_he random forest model yielded the best performance in predicting tumor cell growth.

<!-- image -->

rate induced by the bystander e/ffect (quantifying the e/ffects of dead cells accumulated in the environment) was considered as a local parameter that would vary as a function of initial conditions. Time-resolved curves of tumor cell number for both live and dead tumor cells with di/fferent initial conditions, with or without treatment, were generated from time-resolved microscopy images for model calibration and validation. While we would expect the e/ffect of Cytochalasin B to be stronger at lower extracellular glucose levels, this is not always clearly re/flected in the con/fluence curves of treated tumor cells. Recall that the cell con/fluence is a net e/ffect of both cell proliferation and death-with two sources (glucose depletion and bystander e/ffect) contributing to cell death. When the extracellular glucose level is lower, there is (in general) more cell death (regardless of Cytochalasin B level) compared to high glucose levels and, therefore, more contribution from the third term on the right-hand side of Eq./uni00A0(1). /T\_hus, the e/ffect of Cytochalasin B, although higher, is diluted by the contribution from the bystander e/ffect when we compare the net change in the cell con/fluence. We investigated the relationship between the bystander e/ffect induced death rate ( kbys ) and the initial glucose concentration. A negative correlation (partial correlation coe/fficient = -/uni00A00.41)  between kbys and the total initial glucose level was found. However, when we investigated the correlation between kbys and the accessible glucose level, a stronger negative correlation (partial correlation coe/fficient = -/uni00A00.73) was found. /T\_his pattern matched our previous  /finding 26 (i.e., a partial correlation coe/fficient of -/uni00A00.72 between kbys and the initial glucose level), with the initial glucose level replaced by the initial accessible glucose level.

Vol:.(1234567890)

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Figure/uni00A09. Learning curves of the machine learning models. For each panel, the results for the training and validation sets are shown for a particular model. /T\_he model score ( R 2 ) on the training set (blue curve) and validation set (orange curve) is plotted against the percentage of the complete training set.

<!-- image -->

Numerous mathematical approaches have been developed to model tumor metabolism and growth, but few investigated a nutrient perturbation resulting from a mechanism-directed therapy; e.g., the application of an inhibitor of nutrient transport. In the present study, we not only extended our original model to account for the e/ffect of mechanism-directed therapy, but also validated the model with experimental data obtained from time-resolved microscopy. To accomplish this, we introduced only one extra parameter to quantify the e/ffect of the treatment, without the need for modeling complicated signaling pathways which would lead to a large set of free parameters. /T\_he approach for model calibration described in section "Calibration of the mechanism-based model with Dataset B to reduce the parameter space for Gin" reduced the potential range of the parameter values for Gin , so we could obtain a more reliable estimate for the constant inhibition from the calibration described in section "Calibration of the mechanism-based model with Dataset B to estimate kbys and Gin". Importantly, by allowing the bystander e/ffect induced death rate to be a local parameter the model had the /flexibility to optimally describe the data. /T\_he resulting model was validated in a triple-negative breast cancer cell line (MDA-MB-231). With the model calibrated from the training data, we could predict tumor cell growth with our model with con/fidence, using the initial nutrient condition, seeding density, and dose of Cytochalasin B in the validation data. /T\_his experimental-mathematical approach presents a framework that enables one to test and quantify the e/ffects of drugs designed to perturb intracellular glucose level in any number of cancer cell lines. In particular, we note that the original model was also tested in a HER2 + breast cancer cell line (BT-474) 26 .

We compared the performance of the mechanism-based model with four common machine learning models. /T\_he random forest model, featuring ensemble learning, presented the highest accuracy with the validation set. /T\_he decision tree model performed the best with the training set but not with the validation set, suggesting it may be over/fitting. /T\_he linear regression model, with the least /flexibility and lowest complexity, performed the worst in both the training and validation sets. /T\_he mechanism-based model presented an intermediate accuracy, with R 2 lower than the k -nearest neighbor model and higher than the linear regression model. We further evaluated the performance of the machine learning models with learning curves. /T\_hough both decision tree and random

<!-- image -->

forest models present seemingly unrealistic high performance on the training set, they do learn better from more data, and the gap between the training performance and validation performance is reduced and the validation performance is improved. With the complete training set, they become well generalized to make predictions on unseen data. In addition, the gap between the model performance on the training and validation sets of the Decision Tree (0.11) and Random Forest model (0.07) is between the KNN (0.09) and mechanism-base models (0.19). As neither the learning curves nor the training/validation performance comparison indicates these two models (i.e., decision tree and random forest models) are over/fitting, their high scores on the training set do not seem to be a cause for concern.

/T\_here are several opportunities to extend the results presented in this e/ffort. As in our previous  study 26 , we assume that the e/ffect on glucose availability, as a result of both cell consumption and inhibition on glucose uptake, was entirely re/flected by the time-resolved tumor cell number, through either growth or death. /T\_his could be an oversimpli/fication, considering the complexity of the phenomenon. /T\_herefore, we compared con/fluence time courses of tumor cells supplied with the highest glucose concentration and treated with Cytochalasin B, against tumor cells supplied with di/fferent glucose concentrations and no Cytochalasin B, to estimate the accessible glucose level in the treated cells. A high CCC suggested the glucose level in the treated cells was close to the glucose level in the cells supplied with a di/fferent glucose level but no treatment. While this comparison provides an indirect measurement of the glucose available in the treated cells, future studies should seek a direct measurement of the nutrient dynamics. In particular, we did not explicitly model the e/ffect of Cytochalasin B as an inhibitor of actin  polymerization 52 , but only as an inhibitor of glucose uptake. We simpli/fied our model to be a function of accessible glucose level, driven by metabolism, where the e/ffect of actin polymerization was implicitly captures as 'glucose depletion'. /T\_his could be an oversimpli/fication resulting in an overestimation of the e/ffect of glucose metabolism and would require further studies to separate the e/ffect of Cytochalasin B's dual role. Additionally, we only tested two doses of Cytochalasin B and would require additional measurements to con/firm a relationship between the inhibition constant and the dose. Knowing such a relationship would enable the model to perform predictions at doses not yet tested. Another area for improvement would be to employ time-resolved, non-invasive imaging to track the nutrient level in the cells; we have attempted to develop such a technique based on FRET reporters transfected into the MDA-MB-231 cell  line 53 , but it only provides a relative measure of glucose and lactate concentrations. /T\_he absolute measurement of the dynamics of lactate concentration would also allow us to include more details in tumor cell metabolism in the model.

Although the mechanism-based model did not beat the best machine learning models as quanti/fied by the R 2 , it brings the important bene/fit of easy interpretation as it explicitly accounts for underlying biological mechanisms, entities not typically found in machine learning  approaches 26 . Having a mechanism-based model provides guidance for further experiments and analyses that are not directly possible by interpreting the results from a machine learning approach. /T\_hese studies include, for example, identifying optimal treatment protocols and experimental designs. It is possible that improved predictive accuracy could be achieved using more advanced techniques like feature selection, dimension reduction, or hyperparameter tuning to further enhance the model performance.

## Conclusion

We have developed a mechanism-based model that predicts how glucose accessibility in/fluences tumor cell growth by accounting for the e/ffect of metabolism-directed therapy. /T\_he model was calibrated and validated in a triple-negative breast cancer cell line. We were able to quantify the dose-dependent inhibition constant and con/firm that the dependence of the bystander e/ffect death rate on the initial glucose level was highly correlated to the accessible glucose level. /T\_his mechanism-based model presents predictive capability comparable to complicated machine learning models, but is much easier to interpret and provides the opportunity to directly guide further experiments and analysis in a way not possible with a machine learning approach.

## Data availability

/T\_he datasets used and/or analyzed during the current study available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.

Received: 16 August 2022; Accepted: 19 June 2023

## References

- 2.  El Mjiyad, N., Caro-Maldonado, A., Ramírez-Peinado, S. & Muñoz-Pinedo, C. Sugar-free approaches to cancer cell killing. Oncogene 30 , 253 (2010).
- 1.  Hanahan, D. & Weinberg, R. A. Hallmarks of cancer: /T\_he next generation. Cell 144 , 646-674 (2011).
- 3.  Kennedy, K. M. & Dewhirst, M. W. Tumor metabolism of lactate: /T\_he in/fluence and therapeutic potential for MCT and CD147 regulation. https:// doi. org/ 10. 2217/ fon. 09. 145 (2009).
- 5.  Vander Heiden, M. G. Targeting cancer metabolism: A therapeutic window opens. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 10 , 671 (2011).
- 4.  Tennant, D. A., Durán, R. V. & Gottlieb, E. Targeting metabolic transformation for cancer therapy. Nat. Rev. Cancer 10 , 267 (2010).
- 6.  Anderson, A. R. A. & Quaranta, V. Integrative mathematical oncology. Nat. Rev. Cancer 8 , 227-234 (2008).
- 8.  Yankeelov, T. E. et al. Clinically relevant modeling of tumor growth and treatment response. Sci. Transl. Med. 5 , 187 (2013).
- 7.  Yankeelov, T. E., Atuegwu, N. C., Deane, N. G. & Gore, J. C. Modeling tumor growth and treatment response based on quantitative imaging data. Integr. Biol. 2 , 338 (2010).
- 9.  Enderling, H. & Chaplain, M. Mathematical modeling of tumor growth and treatment. CPD 20 , 4934-4940 (2014).
- 10.  Yankeelov, T. E., Quaranta, V., Evans, K. J. & Rericha, E. C. Toward a science of tumor forecasting for clinical oncology. Can. Res. 75 , 918-923 (2015).

Vol:.(1234567890)

- 11.  Yankeelov, T. E. et al. Multi-scale modeling in clinical oncology: Opportunities and barriers to success. Ann. Biomed. Eng. 44 , 2626-2641 (2016).
- 13.  Anderson, A. R. A. & Maini, P. K. Mathematical oncology. Bull. Math. Biol. 80 , 945-953 (2018).
- 12.  Szymańska, Z., Cytowski, M., Mitchell, E., Macnamara, C. K. & Chaplain, M. A. J. Computational modelling of cancer development and growth: Modelling at multiple scales and multiscale modelling. Bull. Math. Biol. 80 , 1366-1403 (2018).

14.  Rockne, R. C.

et al.

/T\_he 2019 mathematical oncology roadmap.

Phys. Biol.

16

, 041005 (2019).

- 16.  Mendoza-Juez, B., Martínez-González, A., Calvo, G. F. & Pérez-García, V. M. A mathematical model for the glucose-lactate metabolism of in/uni00A0vitro cancer cells. Bull. Math. Biol. 74 , 1125-1142 (2012).
- 15.  Bull, J. A. & Byrne, H. M. /T\_he hallmarks of mathematical oncology. Proc. IEEE 110 , 523-540 (2022).
- 17.  Astanin, S. & Preziosi, L. Mathematical modelling of the Warburg e/ffect in tumour cords. J. /T\_heor. Biol. 258 , 578-590 (2009).
- 19.  Phipps, C., Molavian, H. & Kohandel, M. A microscale mathematical model for metabolic symbiosis: Investigating the e/ffects of metabolic inhibition on ATP turnover in tumors. J. /T\_heor. Biol. 366 , 103-114 (2015).
- 18.  McGillen, J. B. et al. Glucose-lactate metabolic cooperation in cancer: Insights from a spatial mathematical model and implications for targeted therapy. J. /T\_heor. Biol. 361 , 190-203 (2014).
- 20.  Robertson-Tessi, M., Gillies, R. J., Gatenby, R. A. & Anderson, A. R. A. Impact of metabolic heterogeneity on tumor growth, invasion, and treatment outcomes. Can. Res. 75 , 1567-1579 (2015).
- 22.  Chen, Y., Wang, H., Zhang, J., Chen, K. & Li, Y. Simulation of avascular tumor growth by agent-based game model involving phenotype-phenotype interactions. Sci. Rep. 5 , 17992 (2016).
- 21.  Anderson, A. R. A., Weaver, A. M., Cummings, P. T. & Quaranta, V. Tumor morphology and phenotypic evolution driven by selective pressure from the microenvironment. Cell 127 , 905-915 (2006).
- 23.  Kianercy, A., Veltri, R. & Pienta, K. J. Critical transitions in a game theoretic model of tumour metabolism. Interface Focus 4 , 20140014-20140014 (2014).
- 25.  Epstein, T., Gatenby, R. A. & Brown, J. S. /T\_he Warburg e/ffect as an adaptation of cancer cells to rapid /fluctuations in energy demand. PLoS ONE 12 , e0185085 (2017).
- 24.  Archetti, M. Heterogeneity and proliferation of invasive cancer subclones in game theory models of the Warburg e/ffect. Cell Prolif. 48 , 259-269 (2015).
- 26.  Yang,  J. et al. An experimental-mathematical approach to predict tumor cell growth as a function of glucose availability in breast cancer cell lines. PLoS ONE 16 , e0240765 (2021).
- 28.  Roy, M. & Finley, S. D. Computational model predicts the e/ffects of targeting cellular metabolism in pancreatic cancer. Front. Physiol. 8 , 217 (2017).
- 27.  Cui, S. Analysis of a mathematical model for the growth of tumors under the action of external inhibitors. J. Math. Biol. 44 , 395-426 (2002).
- 29.  Eyassu, F. & Angione, C. Modelling pyruvate dehydrogenase under hypoxia and its role in cancer metabolism. R. Soc. Open Sci. 4 , 170360 (2017).
- 31.  Kim,  B.-C. et al. Machine learning model for lymph node metastasis prediction in breast cancer using random forest algorithm and mitochondrial metabolism hub genes. Appl. Sci. 11 , 2897 (2021).
- 30.  Katzir,  R. et al. /T\_he landscape of tiered regulation of breast cancer cell metabolism. Sci. Rep. 9 , 17760 (2019).
- 32.  Gómez, O. V. et al. Analysis of cross-combinations of feature selection and machine-learning classi/fication methods based on [18F]

33.  SOP: /T\_hawing, propagation and cryopreservation of NCI-PBCF-HTB26 (MDA-MB-231). 25.

- F-FDG PET/CT radiomic features for metabolic response prediction of metastatic breast cancer lesions. Cancers 14 , 2922 (2022).
- 34.  Estensen, R. D. & Plagemann, P. G. W. Cytochalasin B: Inhibition of glucose and glucosamine transport. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 69 , 1430-1434 (1972).
- 36.  Li Bi, W., Parysek, L. M., Warnick, R. & Stambrook, P. J. In/uni00A0vitro evidence that metabolic cooperation is responsible for the bystander e/ffect observed with HSV tk retroviral gene therapy. Hum. Gene /T\_her. 4 , 725-731 (1993).
- 35.  Freeman,  S.M. et al. /T\_he "bystander e/ffect": tumor regression when a fraction of the tumor mass is genetically modi/fied. Cancer Res. 53 , 5274-83 (1993).
- 37.  Maulud, D. & Abdulazeez, A. M. A review on linear regression comprehensive in machine learning. JASTT 1 , 140-147 (2020).
- 39.  Altman, N. S. An introduction to kernel and nearest-neighbor nonparametric regression. Am. Stat. 46 , 175-185 (1992).
- 38.  Fix, E. & Hodges, J. L. Discriminatory analysis. Nonparametric discrimination: Consistency properties. Int. Stat. Rev. 57 , 238 (1989).
- 40.  Loh, W. Classi/fication and regression trees. WIREs Data Min. Knowl. Discov. 1 , 14-23 (2011).
- 42.  Ho, T. K. /T\_he random subspace method for constructing decision forests. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 20 , 832-844 (1998).
- 41.  Ho, T. K. Random decision forests. In Proceedings of 3rd International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition vol. 1 278-282 (IEEE Comput. Soc. Press, 1995).
- 43.  Opitz, D. & Maclin, R. Popular ensemble methods: An empirical study. Jair 11 , 169-198 (1999).
- 45.  Rokach, L. Ensemble-based classi/fiers. Artif. Intell. Rev. 33 , 1-39 (2010).
- 44.  Polikar, R. Ensemble based systems in decision making. IEEE Circuits Syst. Mag. 6 , 21-45 (2006).
- 46.  Breiman, L. Bagging predictors. Mach. Learn. 24 , 123-140 (1996).
- 48.  Kleinberg, E. M. An overtraining-resistant stochastic modeling method for pattern recognition. Ann. Stat. 24 , 2319 (1996).
- 47.  Kleinberg, E. M. Stochastic discrimination. Ann. Math. Artif. Intell. 1 , 207-239 (1990).
- 49.  Kleinberg, E. M. On the algorithmic implementation of stochastic discrimination. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 22 , 473-490 (2000).
- 51.  Saravanan, N., Sathish, G. & Balajee, J. M. Data wrangling and data leakage in machine learning for healthcare. JETIR 5 , 553-557 (2018).
- 50.  Friedman, J. H. /T\_he Elements of Statistical Learning: Data Mining, Inference, and Prediction (Springer Open, 2017).
- 52.  MacLean-Fletcher, S. Mechanism of action of cytochalasin B on actin. Cell 20 , 329-341 (1980).
- 53.  Yang,  J. et al. Longitudinal FRET imaging of glucose and lactate dynamics and response to therapy in breast cancer cells. Mol. Imaging Biol. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s11307- 021- 01639-4 (2021).

## Acknowledgements

/T\_his project was supported by CPRIT for funding through RR160005 and RP220225, and the National Cancer Institute for funding through NCI U01CA253540, and R01CA186193. T.E.Y. is a CPRIT Scholar in Cancer Research.

## Author contributions

J.Y., J.V., D.A.H., and T.E.Y. planned the studies.  J.Y. performed the experiments.  J.Y., J.L., and D.A.H. performed the data analysis with insights and guidance provided by A.M.J.  J.Y. and T.E.Y. wrote the manuscript.  All authors reviewed and edited the manuscript.

Vol.:(0123456789)

## Competing interests

/T\_he authors declare no competing interests.

## Additional information

Supplementary Information /T\_he online version contains supplementary material available at https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ s41598- 023- 37238-2.

Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to T.E.Y.

Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.

Publisher's note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional a/ffiliations.

<!-- image -->

Open Access /T\_his article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. /T\_he images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http:// creat iveco mmons. org/ licen ses/ by/4. 0/.

- © /T\_he Author(s) 2023

Vol:.(1234567890)