OPEN

<!-- image -->

## Research on molecular characteristics of ADME-related genes in kidney renal clear cell carcinoma

Haiyu Zhang ͷ,͸,ͺ,ͻ,ͼ , Weisheng Huang ͷ,͸,ͺ,ͻ,ͼ , Mutong Chen ͷ,͸,ͺ,ͻ,ͼ , Yuhan Liu ͷ,ͺ,ͻ , Bing Yan ͷ,ͺ,ͻ , Shuanzhu Mou ͷ,ͺ,ͻ , Wendong Jiang ͷ,ͺ,ͻ & Hongbing Mei ͷ,͸,͹,ͺ,ͻ *

Genes involved in drug absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion ȋADMEȌ are named ADME genes. However, the comprehensive role of ADME genes in kidney renal clear cell carcinoma ȋKIRCȌ remains unclear. Using the clinical and gene expression data of KIRC patients downloaded from The Cancer Genome Atlas ȋTCGAȌ, ArrayExpress, and the Gene Expression Omnibus ȋGEOȌ databases, we cluster patients into two patterns, and the population with a relatively poor prognosis demonstrated higher level of immunosuppressive cell infiltration and higher proportion of glycolytic subtypes. Then, ͷͽ ADME genes combination identified through the least absolute shrinkage and selection operator algorithm ȋLASSO, ͷͶͶͶ timesȌ was utilized to calculate the ADME score. The ADME score was found to be an independent predictor of prognosis in KIRC and to be tightly associated with the infiltration level of immune cells, metabolic properties, tumor-related signaling pathways, genetic variation, and responses to chemotherapeutics. Our work revealed the characteristics of ADME in KIRC. Assessing the ADME profiles of individual patients can deepen our comprehension of tumor microenvironment ȋTMEȌ features in KIRC and can aid in developing more personalized and effective therapeutic strategies.

Keywords Kidney renal clear cell carcinoma (KIRC), ADME genes, Tumor immune microenvironment, Glycolipid metabolism, Somatic mutation analysis

Renal cell carcinoma is one of the most common malignant cancers in the  world 1 . It is estimated that there are approximately 430,000 new cases of renal cell carcinoma annually and more than 179,000 kidney cancer-related deaths per  year 2 . Kidney renal clear cell carcinoma (KIRC) represents the prevailing histological subtype in clinical practice and accounts for the majority of kidney cancer-related  deaths 3 . /T\_hough localized KIRC can bene/fit from surgery, about 30% of KIRC patients will recrudesce and develop metastasis, which leads to a 5-year survival rate of only 10% 4,5 . Now, anti-angiogenic therapy and immune checkpoint inhibitors can only achieve good outcomes in a proportion of patients with KIRC, suggesting that the molecular landscape of KIRC patients needs to be further subdivided to provide precise individualized treatment and prognostic evaluation for KIRC  patients 6 .

ADME genes are genes that participate in drug absorption, distribution, metabolism, and elimination processes 7 , including 32 essential genes and 266 additional  genes 8 and playing a role in Gut-Liver-Kidney  Axis 9 . Previous studies have shown that the ADME genes are abnormal in methylation and of transcriptome level expression in cancer  patients 10,11 . What is more, according to recent research, ADME genes play crucial roles in pharmacokinetics, and can serve as biomarkers for predicting drug reaction, adverse e/ffects, and survival outcomes. For example, Duan Z demonstrated that ATP binding cassette subfamily B member 4 (ABCB4) contributes to acquired resistance of doxorubicin in breast  cancer 12 . Matheux A reported that solute carrier family 16 member 1 (SLC16A1) expression is associated with the response to kinase inhibitors in prostate  cancers 13 . Cheng

ͷ Department of Urology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Shenzhen University, Shenzhen Second People's Hospital, Shenzhen,  China. ͸ Department  of  Urology,  Shantou  University  Medical  College,  Shantou,  China. ͹ Shenzhen Second  People's  Hospital,  Clinical  Medicine  College  of  Anhui  Medical  University,  Shenzhen,  China. ͺ Shenzhen Institute  of  Advanced  Technology,  Chinese  Academy  of  Sciences,  Shenzhen,  China. ͻ Shenzhen  Institute  of Synthetic  Biology,  Shenzhen  Institutes  of  Advanced  Technology,  Chinese  Academy  of  Sciences,  Shenzhen, China. ͼ These authors contributed equally to this work: Haiyu Zhang, Weisheng Huang and Mutong Chen. * email: hbmeiͼ;@ͷͼ͹.com

glyph<c=25,font=/RWIPFL+Corbel>

SY revealed that glutathione S-transferase mu 3 (GSTM3) correlated with temozolomide resistance in glioblastoma   multiforme 14 . Certain essential ADME genes that have the potential to predict survival outcome in various types of cancer were discovered by Hu et/uni00A0al. 15 . Overexpression of dipeptidase 1 (DPEP1) could increase sensitivity to gemcitabine in pancreatic ductal  adenocarcinoma 16 . Nevertheless, there has been no systematic exploration of the biological process, patient classi/fication, and prognostic prediction capabilities of ADME genes in KIRC.

Herein, a set of ADME genes was employed to di/fferentiate between di/fferent subgroups of KIRC patients with respect to overall survival, immunophenotypes, and metabolic characteristics by unsupervised clustering. Furthermore, we constructed a new independent prognostic marker named ADME score based on 17 ADME genes from the LASSO method and compared the biological function, genomic landscapes, tumor microenvironment (TME), and drug sensitivity of patients in high ADME score group and low ADME score group. We found that the ADME genes signature was correlated with genomic variation, tumor metabolism, and immune microenvironments in KIRC and could guide individualized therapy for KIRC patients.

## Results

Comprehensive analysis of ADMEs was performed using multi-omics data of the TCGA-KIRC samples. As displayed in Fig./uni00A01A and Supplementary Fig./uni00A0S1A, the transcriptomic data analysis revealed that 49 out of 298 ADME genes were either upregulated or downregulated in KIRC compared to non-tumor kidney tissues. /T\_hese di/fferentially upregulated or downregulated expressed genes were mainly involved in metabolism and molecular transport based on GO and KEGG enrichment analysis (Supplementary Fig./uni00A0S1B, C). In the KIRC cohort, univariate Cox regression analysis showed that 139 out of 298 ADME genes were signi/ficantly associated with prognosis. In the end, we obtained the 26 ADMEs simultaneously presented di/fferential expression and prognostic value in KIRC between the two sets mentioned above by taking their intersection (Fig./uni00A01B). /T\_he KIRC and normal patients could be di/fferentiated based on the expression levels of the 26 ADME genes, as shown by the principal component analysis (PCA) plot (Fig./uni00A01C) and the di/fferential mRNA expression heatmap (Supplementary Fig./uni00A0S1D). /T\_he result of univariate Cox analysis of these ADMEs revealed that 9 of them were identi/fied as risk factors, with a hazard ratio (HR) greater than 1, while 17 were identi/fied as protective factors, with a HR less than 1 for TCGA-KIRC cohort prognosis (Fig./uni00A01D). /T\_he result of somatic mutations analysis displayed that these genes had a low mutation rate (8.03%) in the TCGA-KIRC cohort (Fig./uni00A01E). CNV status analysis in TCGAKIRC cohort indicated that copy number losses were most frequent in these ADMEs, especially ALDH4A1 and ATP binding cassette subfamily B member 6 (ABCB6) (Fig./uni00A01F). Figure/uni00A01G displays the chromosomal positions of these ADME genes that exhibit CNV.

## The genetic landscape and transcriptional alterations of ADME genes in KIRC

## Identification of ADME patterns in KIRC

Using the ConsensusClusterPlus R package, patients with distinct ADME pro/files were classi/fied based on the mRNA expression of 26 ADMEs. Unsupervised clustering e/ffectively di/fferentiated two distinct patterns, with 295 cases of Cluster 1 and 230 cases of Cluster 2 (Fig./uni00A02A). To evaluate the clustering e/ffect of the two ADME patterns, PCA and tSNE were conducted. /T\_he results indicated that the two patterns were well distinguished (Fig./uni00A02B, C). Similar clustering results were found in the E-MTAB-1980 dataset and the GSE167573 dataset (Supplementary Fig./uni00A0S2A, B, C), proving the stability and applicability of the classi/fication. We further found that there were signi/ficant di/fferences in TNM stage and vital status between the two ADME patterns of TCGA-KIRC (Fig./uni00A02D, E). A survival analysis was performed to evaluate the clinical prognostic value of ADME subtypes in KIRC patients (Fig./uni00A02F). /T\_he results demonstrated a conspicuous distinction in overall survival between the two subgroups in three cohorts, including the TCGA cohort ( P < 0.0001), the E-MTAB-1980 cohort ( P = 0.0028), and the GSE167573 cohort ( P = 0.036).

## Different tumor microenvironment features of ADME patterns in KIRC

As displayed in Supplementary Fig./uni00A0S3A and B, the two ADME clusters in TCGA had variation in several metabolic biological processes, including glycosaminoglycan biosynthesis, fatty acid metabolism, and tryptophan metabolism through GSVA analysis. Subsequent ORA (Supplementary Fig./uni00A0S3C) con/firmed the di/fferent metabolic status between the two patterns in GSVA results. Furthermore, we performed some analyses to explore the discrepancy in immunity features between the two ADME clusters. Firstly, most major histocompatibility complexes (MHCs) demonstrated a low expression in Cluster 1 (Fig./uni00A03A). In addition, we compared various molecular markers of the immunotherapy, including 23 inhibitory immune checkpoint molecules, 46 immunostimulant molecules, 41 chemokines, and 18 chemokines receptor molecules between the two clusters (Supplementary Fig./uni00A0S4A). Next, we assessed the in/filtration of immune cells in the tumor microenvironment of KIRC of the two ADME patterns. Taking into account the results of the survival analysis (as shown in Fig./uni00A02G), it was found that patients in Cluster 1 with poor survival outcomes displayed high in/filtration of regulatory T cells (Tregs) ( P < 0.001), M0 macrophages ( P < 0.0001), M2 macrophages ( P < 0.05), and plasma B cells ( P < 0.05) in the tumor microenvironment. Conversely, patients in Cluster 2, associated with a favorable survival outcome, showed in/filtration by CD8 + T cells ( P < 0.05), resting and activated NK cells ( P < 0.01),  monocytes  ( P < 0.01), M1 macrophages ( P < 0.01), and activated mast cells ( P < 0.001) (as depicted in Fig./uni00A03B). While no signi/ficant di/fferences were observed among naive B cells, rest memory CD4 + T cells, and neutrophils. /T\_hese /findings suggest that the ADME subtypes may be associated with distinct immune cell in/filtration patterns in the TME of KIRC. In addition, we also evaluated tumor immune microenvironment signaling pathways' scores in two ADME patterns using ssGSEA analysis. As shown in Fig./uni00A03C, enrichment scores of cell cycle and regulators, DNA replication and damage repair, mismatch and nucleotide excision repair, homologous recombination, and pan-/fibroblast transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β) response were higher in Cluster 1 than in Cluster 2. In

Vol:.(1234567890)

Figure/uni00A01. Identi/fication of ADMEs and detection of mutations in kidney renal clear cell carcinoma (KIRC). ( a ) Volcano map exhibits 49 of 298 ADMEs showing di/fferential mRNA expression in KIRC based on transcriptomic data of samples with KIRC from TCGA-KIRC cohort. Red indicates up-regulation and blue represents down-regulation. ( b ) Venn diagram shows 26 ADMEs displaying both di/fferential expression and prognostic signi/ficance in KIRC. ( c ) Principal component analysis (PCA) distinguishes tumor (red) and normal samples (blue). ( d ) Univariate Cox regression analysis of 26 ADMEs associated with clinical prognosis in KIRC. ( e ) Waterfall plot shows the mutational landscape of the 26 ADMEs. ( f ) Copy number variation (CNV) in 26 ADMEs in TCGA-KIRC cohort. Deletions, blue dots; Ampli/fications, red dots. ( g ) CNV locations of 26 ADMEs are labeled on the chromosome.

<!-- image -->

contrast, enrichment scores of angiogenesis, antigen processing machinery, and /fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3)-related genes were lower in Cluster 1 than in Cluster 2. /T\_he analysis of the relationship between two ADME subtypes and six Immune  subtypes 17 exhibited that Cluster 1 possessed high proportion interferons (IFN)-gamma Dominant Immune subtype and less In/flammatory Immune subtype than Cluster 2 (Fig./uni00A03D). Finally, the higher TIDE score (Fig./uni00A03E) and lower IPS (Fig./uni00A03F) in Cluster 1 than in Cluster 2 together suggested that there might be a tumor immune dysfunction and a poor response to immunotherapy for samples of Cluster 1.Furthermore, we conducted a detailed analysis of di/fferentially expressed genes (DEGs) between the two ADME clusters (Supplementary Table/uni00A02). We speci/fically focused on the top 20 DEGs to explore their relationship with ADME gene expression and the TME (Supplementary Figure S5). Our /findings revealed that these DEGs are also associated with the TME.

Vol.:(0123456789)

N = 55

Figure/uni00A02. Patterns of ADME and their prognostic value in KIRC. ( a ) Two patterns of ADME were identi/fied by unsupervised clustering based on their mRNA levels. Cluster 1, red; Cluster 2, blue. ( b and c ) PCA (B) and T-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (tSNE) (C) veri/fied the two ADME patterns in KIRC. ( d , e ) Heatmap ( d ) and pie chart ( e ) portray the correlation between the ADME patterns and di/fferent clinicopathological characteristics. ( f ) Survival analysis for the two ADME patterns of KIRC patients in TCGAKIRC, E-MTAB-1980, and GSE167573 cohorts.

<!-- image -->

Vol:.(1234567890)

Figure/uni00A03. Tumor immune microenvironment (TIME) characteristics in di/fferent ADME patterns in KIRC. ( a ) Box plot shows the distinction mRNA expression of major histocompatibility complexes (MHCs) for the two ADME patterns. ( b ) Box plot displays the di/fference in in/filtration of immune cells in the two ADME patterns. ( c ) Box plot exhibits the discrepancy in TIME signaling pathways for the two ADME patterns. ( d ) Bar plot demonstrates the otherness of the six immune subtypes in the two ADME patterns. ( e , f ) Box plots show the tumor immune dysfunction and exclusion (TIDE) score (E) and immunophenoscore (IPS) (F) for the two ADME patterns. * P < 0.05;  ** P < 0.01;  *** P < 0.001; **** P < 0.0001; ns, no statistical signi/ficance.

<!-- image -->

## Establishment of ADME score for KIRC

To quantify ADME patterns in KIRC, we developed a scoring system called ADME score. We construct the most suitable scoring system using the LASSO method to further shrink the candidates ADMEs in TCGA-KIRC. A 17 genes combination eventually selected for it had the highest frequency (292, Fig./uni00A04A) and C-index (0.768, Fig./uni00A04B) among all gene combinations. /T\_hen, the ADME score was computed using the expression levels of these 17 genes and their corresponding regression coe/fficients obtained from the LASSO method. /T\_he univariate (Fig./uni00A04C) and multivariate Cox regression analyses indicated that the ADME score ( P < 0.001,  hazard  ratio

Vol.:(0123456789)

Figure/uni00A04. Construction and validation of the ADME score for quanti/fing ADME patterns of KIRC patients. ( a , b ) Bar plots display the frequency ( a ) and c-index ( b ) of gene models from the LASSO regression (1000 times). ( c , d ) Univariate Cox ( c ) and multivariate Cox ( d ) analyses for ADME score and other clinical factors in TCGA-KIRC dataset. ( e ) Survival analysis for the two ADME score groups of KIRC patients in TCGA-KIRC, E-MTAB-1980, and GSE167573 cohorts. ( f ) Time ROC analysis for the two ADME score groups of KIRC patients in TCGA-KIRC, E-MTAB-1980, and GSE167573 cohorts.

<!-- image -->

Vol:.(1234567890)

(HR) = 2.44, 95% con/fidence interval (CI): 1.81-3.29, Fig./uni00A04D), Age ( P = 0.010,  hazard  ratio  (HR) = 1.02,  95% con/fidence interval (CI): 1.01-1.04, Fig./uni00A04D) and M stage ( P < 0.001, hazard ratio (HR) = 2.18, 95% con/fidence interval (CI): 1.50-3.17, Fig./uni00A04D)were independent prognostic factors for KIRC patients in the TCGA dataset. Two other KIRC cohorts' ADME scores were constructed using the same regression coe/fficients and then we classi/fied KIRC samples as the high ADME score and low ADME score groups based on the median value of ADME score in respective cohorts. Compared with the low ADME score group, patients with high ADME scores all had a poor prognosis (Fig./uni00A04E) in the TCGA cohort ( P < 0.0001), the E-MTAB-1980 cohort ( P = 0.0082), and the GSE167573 cohort ( P = 0.022). What is more, the area under curve (AUC) values were evaluated in these datasets, and the results displayed that the ADME score had a middle accuracy (AUC > 0.7) in predicting 1-, 3-, and 5-year survival of KIRC patients of TCGA dataset and E-MTAB-1980 dataset (Fig./uni00A04F).

## Tumor immune microenvironment of ADME score groups in KIRC

In the same way, we analyzed the TIME in the two groups of ADME score (Supplementary Fig./uni00A0S4B, Fig./uni00A05), and the results were similar to two ADME Clusters. MHCs had a high expression in the low ADME score group (Fig./uni00A05A). /T\_he cluster associated with a positive survival outcome, characterized by a low ADME score, demonstrated high levels of monocyte in/filtration, M1 macrophages, resting myeloid dendritic cells, and activated

High

Figure/uni00A05. TIME characteristics in di/fferent ADME score groups in KIRC. ( a ) Box plot shows the distinction of MHCs mRNA expression for the two ADME score groups. ( b ) Box plot displays the di/fference in in/filtration of immune cells in the two ADME score groups. ( c ) Bar plot demonstrates the discrepancy of the six immune subtypes in the two ADME score groups. ( d ) Box plot exhibits the ADME score in six immune subtypes. ( e , f ) Box plots show the TIDE score ( e ) and IPS ( f ) for the two ADME score groups. * P < 0.05;  ** P < 0.01;  *** P < 0.001; **** P < 0.0001; Ns, No statistical signi/ficance.

<!-- image -->

Vol.:(0123456789)

CAF

mast cells whereas those in the high ADME score group corresponding to a poor survival outcome showed in/filtration by follicular helper T cell, Tregs, and M0 macrophages (Fig./uni00A05B). In addition, the low ADME score group possessed higher proportion of In/flammatory Immune subtype and less IFN-gamma Dominant Immune subtype than the high ADME score group (Fig./uni00A05C). Consistent with this, the ADME score was higher in IFNgamma Dominant Immune and Wound Healing Immune subtypes, but lower in In/flammatory Immune  subtype 17 (Fig./uni00A05D). In the end, we explored the potential correlation between the ADME score and the response to immunotherapy. Our /findings revealed that patients belonging to the low ADME score group exhibited a reduced TIDE score (Fig./uni00A05E) and an increased IPS (Fig./uni00A05F), indicating that they may have a better response to immunotherapy. Based on the comprehensive analysis of ADME clusters and the TME, we observed that the population with a relatively poor prognosis (Cluster 1 and the high ADME score group) exhibited elevated levels of immunosuppressive components. /T\_hen, we assessed the immune cell in/filtration of 17 ADME genes. Notably, DHRS9 and ALDH6A1 exhibited signi/ficant associations with the in/filtration of most immune cells (Supplementary Fig./uni00A0S6A). Furthermore, we validated the mRNA expression of some ADME genes in the normal renal cell line (HK2) and renal cancer cell lines (769P and 786O) by qRT-PCR (Supplementary Fig./uni00A0S6B, C). In 769P, ALDH4A1 ( P < 0.001) and ALDH6A1 ( P < 0.05) demonstrated low expression levels, whereas DHRS9 ( P < 0.05), and SLC16A1 ( P < 0.01) exhibited high expression levels. Similarly, in the other renal adenocarcinoma cell line 786O, consistent expression patterns were observed for ALDH4A1 ( P < 0.001), DHRS9 ( P < 0.01), and SLC16A1 ( P < 0.001). In addition, we used immunohistochemical data from the Human Protein Atlas (HPA) database to verify the expression of these genes at the protein level (Supplementary Figure/uni00A0S6D-I). Among them, the trend of protein expression of ALDH4A1 and SLC16A1 was consistent with that of their mRNA expression.

## Metabolic microenvironment and signaling pathways associated with the ADME score of KIRC

Based on an enrichment analysis of the TCGA-KIRC cohort by GSVA (Fig./uni00A06A), the two ADME score groups had signi/ficant di/fferences in metabolic-related pathways, which was similar to the results of GSVA in two ADME clusters (Supplementary Fig./uni00A0S4B). Next, utilizing glycolytic and cholesterogenic genes, TCGA-KIRC was categorized into four metabolic subtypes: glycolytic, cholesterogenic, mixed, and quiescent (Supplementary Fig./uni00A0S7). In the prognostic analysis of overall survival, the glycolytic and quiescent subtypes were worse than the cholesterogenic and mixed subtypes ( P < 0.0001,  Fig./uni00A06B). Meanwhile, more glycolytic subtypes were present in ADME Cluster 1 ( P < 0.05), high ADME score group ( P < 0.001, Fig./uni00A06C, D), and the glycolytic subtypes had higher ADME scores than cholesterogenic subtypes ( P < 0.0001, Fig./uni00A06E). /T\_hese results were in accordance with the Warburg e/ffect, in which tumor cells exhibit a preference for using glycolysis as opposed to oxidative phosphorylation for energy generation, suggesting a connection between ADME subtypes and the metabolic microenvironment in KIRC. Furthermore, we explored the relationship of ADME score with several oncogenic signaling pathways and tumor immune-related signaling pathways in the TCGA-KIRC dataset. As shown in Fig./uni00A06F and G, the enrichment scores of nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells (NF-ĸB) pathway and Janus kinase (JAK)-signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) pathway were upregulated in the samples with high ADME score and were positively correlated with ADME score. In contrast, the enrichment scores of TGF-β pathway and NOTCH pathway were down-regulated in the high ADME score group and were negatively correlated with the ADME score. While no signi/ficant di/fferences were observed of the Wnt signaling pathway and the PI3K-AKT signaling pathway between the two ADME score groups. Most tumor microenvironment signaling pathways, especially DNA-related molecular features, were signi/ficantly di/fferent between the two ADME scores groups (Fig./uni00A06H, I).

## Genomic characteristics of two ADME score groups in KIRC

Taking into account the changes in enrichment scores for DNA-related biological processes, we further analyzed the distinctions between high and low ADME score groups at the genomic level in the TCGA-KIRC dataset. /T\_he waterfall plots (Fig./uni00A07A, B) were used to display the top 20 genes with mutation frequency. Genes with distinct mutation di/fferences ( P < 0.05) between the two ADME score groups were described using a forest plot (Fig./uni00A07C). Six genes (BRCA associated protein 1 (BAP1), mammalian target of rapamycin (MTOR), AHNAK Nucleoprotein 2 (AHNAK2), ephrin type-A receptor 5 (EPHA5), /fibronectin 1 (FN1) and moesin-ezrin-radixin like (MERLIN) tumor suppressor (NF2)) had a higher mutation frequency in high ADME score group than low ADME score group and their mutations were associated with the poor overall outcome in TCGA-KIRC patients (Fig./uni00A07D). To provide a comprehensive depiction of the somatic mutation features, we identi/fied three mutational signatures in the two ADME score groups (Supplementary Fig./uni00A0S8A-D). DNA HRD, smoking, and de/ficiency of DNA mismatch repair (MMR) predominated in the high ADME score group, whereas DNA HRD was the main pattern in the low ADME score group (Fig./uni00A07E, F). Next, we used topographic maps to show CNV for two ADME score groups (Supplementary Fig./uni00A0S8E, F). A signi/ficant increase in ampli/fication and depletion of copy number was seen in the high ADME score group (Fig./uni00A07G, H). Finally, compared with the low ADME score group, the high ADME score group had a noticeably higher number of segments (Fig./uni00A07I), higher FGA score (Fig./uni00A07J-L), aneuploidy score (Fig./uni00A07M), and HRD score (Fig./uni00A07N), which may contribute to the unfavorable prognosis of patients with a high ADME score.

## Prediction  of  KIRC  patients'  pathologic  stage,  prognosis  and  chemotherapy  sensitivity  by ADME score

We additionally evaluated the clinical signi/ficance of the ADME score in the TCGA-KIRC cohort. As shown in Fig./uni00A08A-D, the high ADME score group exhibited a greater proportion of advanced pathologic stages, such as T3/T4, N1, M1, and Stage III/IV, compared with the low ADME score group. At the same time, the ADME score increased with the progression of the pathologic stages (Fig./uni00A08E-H). In addition, survival analysis of each stage

Vol:.(1234567890)

Figure/uni00A06. /T\_he metabolic microenvironment and signaling pathways varied in di/fferent ADME score groups in KIRC. ( a ) GSVA enrichment analysis exhibiting biological process and pathway di/fferences between ADME score groups. Red indicates activated pathways and blue indicates inhibited pathways in Heatmaps. ( b ) Survival analysis for the four metabolic subtypes (glycolytic, cholesterogenic, mixed, and quiescent). ( c , d ) Bar plot ( c ) and alluvial diagram ( d ) show the relationship among the two ADME score groups, the two ADME clusters, and the four metabolic subtypes. ( e ) Box plot exhibits the ADME score in four metabolic classi/fications. ( f -i ) Box plots ( f , i ) display the di/fference in enrichment scores of oncogenic signaling pathways and tumor immunerelated signaling pathways between the two ADME score groups. Heatmaps ( g , h ) portray the correlation between ADME score and enrichment scores of oncogenic signaling pathways and tumor immune-related signaling pathways. * P < 0.05;  ** P < 0.01;  *** P < 0.001; **** P < 0.0001; Ns, no statistical signi/ficance.

<!-- image -->

Vol.:(0123456789)

PI3K

Figure/uni00A07. Somatic mutations, mutational signatures, and CNV for the two ADME score groups in KIRC. ( a , b ) Waterfall plots demonstrate the somatic mutation distributions of the 20 genes with the highest somatic mutation frequencies in the high ADME score group (A) and the low ADME score group (B). ( c ) Forest plot reveals di/fferentially mutated genes in the two ADME score groups. (D) Survival analysis for six di/fferentially mutated genes in TCGA-KIRC cohort. (E, F) Panel plots show the three mutational signatures in the high ADME score group (E) and the low ADME score group (F). ( g , h ) Box plots indicate the di/fference in CNV burden between the two ADME score groups. ( i -n ) Box plots display the di/fference in the number of segments ( i ), fraction genome altered (all, gain and loss, j -l ), aneuploidy score ( m ), and homologous recombination defects ( n ) between the two ADME score groups. Focal Gain/Loss, copy number gain/loss in focal level; Broad Gain/Loss, copy number gain/loss in broad level; Double Del, homozygous deletion; Single Del, single copy deletion; Normal, diploid normal copy; Low Amp, low-level copy number ampli/fication; High Amp, high-level copy number ampli/fication. * P < 0.05;  ** P < 0.01;  *** P < 0.001; **** P < 0.0001; ns, no statistical signi/ficance.

<!-- image -->

Vol:.(1234567890)

subgroup revealed that the ADME score had a good prediction ability of prognosis except for N1 stage (Supplementary Fig./uni00A0S9A-F). Time ROC and time C-index analysis displayed that the ADME score had better accuracy in predicting patients' prognosis than other clinical characteristics (age and pathologic stages) in the fourth to tenth year (Supplementary Fig./uni00A0S9G, H). Utilizing drug data from the CTRP2 and PRISM database, we computed the AUC values of conventional chemotherapeutics for KIRC, and found that four drugs yielded consistent and signi/ficant outcomes in both databases. Erlotinib displayed higher AUC values in the high ADME score group as compared to the low ADME score group (Fig./uni00A08I), whereas bortezomib, paclitaxel, and gemcitabine exhibited an inverse pattern of AUC values (Fig./uni00A08J-L), which can inform the selection of drugs for clinical chemotherapy.

## Discussion

/T\_he categorization of ADME genes is based on their involvement in the pharmacokinetic process, including drug-metabolizing enzymes in phase I and II, drug transporters, and modi/fiers. Although some ADME genes have been explored in several studies of  KIRC 18-20 , no systematic studies have been conducted to elucidate the biological role and clinical relevance of the ADME gene in KIRC. In the present study, we employed unsupervised clustering to discern ADME patterns. Subsequently, we conducted an integrated analysis to evaluate

Figure/uni00A08. Further assessment of the clinical value of ADME score and chemotherapy resistance analysis. ( A -D ) Bar charts reveal the proportion of patients with di/fferent clinicopathological stages [T stage ( A ); N stage ( B ); M stage ( C ); Stage ( D )] in di/fferent ADME score groups. ( E -H ) Box plot exhibits the ADME score of patients with di/fferent clinicopathological stages [T stage ( E ); N stage ( F ); M stage ( G ); Stage ( H )]. ( I -L ) Response to six common chemotherapeutics [erlotinib ( I ); bortezomib ( J ); paclitaxel ( K ); gemcitabine ( L )] for high and low ADME score groups in KIRC. * P < 0.05;  ** P < 0.01;  *** P < 0.001; **** P < 0.0001; Ns, no statistical signi/ficance.

<!-- image -->

k

Vol.:(0123456789)

discrepancies within the TIME (the immunomodulatory gene expression, abundance of tumor-in/filtrating cells, and immune-related signaling pathways) and metabolic characteristics between the ADME subtypes. /T\_hen, we developed a scoring system, the ADME score, and divided KIRC patients into two groups. In addition to the previous analysis, we also characterized the landscape of genetic variation between the ADME score groups. Finally, we evaluated the clinical and predictive signi/ficance of the ADME score in relation to the response to chemotherapy and immunotherapy.

In addition, our /findings indicated that ALDH4A1 and SLC16A1, whose expression levels were di/fferent between normal renal cell and renal carcinoma cell, were associated with the majority of immune cell in/filtration. ALDH4A1, a mitochondrial matrix NAD-dependent dehydrogenase, takes part in the proline degradation pathway (https:// www. genec ards. org/). Muzio et/uni00A0al. have reviewed that ALDH4A1 can be as a considered marker of normal and cancer stem  cells 26 . Peng et/uni00A0al. have suggested that ALDH4A1 can be used as a biomarker to predict the prognosis of colorectal cancer  patients 27 . SLC16A1, a proton-linked monocarboxylate transporter, mediates the movement of many monocarboxylates across the plasma membrane (https:// www. genec ards. org/). Morioka et/uni00A0al. have found that SLC16A1 can promote the anti-in/flammatory environment through the production of lactate 28 . In recent years, SLC16A1 has been investigated as an oncogene in numerous types of  cancer 29-31 .  Yo u et/uni00A0al. have revealed that the upregulation of SLC16A1 regulated the glycolysis in cervical  cancer 31 . However, the function of ALDH4A1 and SLC16A1 in renal clear cell carcinoma remains unclear. Here, we experimentally veri/fied for the /first time that their mRNA expression was di/fferent in the normal renal cell and renal cancer cell, helping to provide insight into the function and mechanisms of them in KIRC.

/T\_he TIME, comprising cancer cells, stromal tissue, immune cells, cytokines, and other factors, has a close connection to tumor initiation and  progression 21,22 . In this study, we separated patients with KIRC into two patterns according to the mRNA expression of ADME genes from TCGA-KIRC and validated our /findings in two other KIRC cohorts. Our /findings showed that Cluster 1 was predominantly comprised of immune cells facilitating a tumor immunosuppressive response, and patients in this cluster exhibited inferior survival outcomes relative to those in Cluster 2, which had a higher prevalence of certain anti-tumor immune cells. In an immunogenetic analysis of multiple tumor types within the TCGA database, /T\_horsson and his colleagues discovered that the majority of renal carcinoma falls under the C3 (In/flammatory)  subtype 17 . Previous studies have reported that tumors exhibiting an immune-in/flamed phenotype were more responsive to  immunotherapy 23 . A lower TIDE score and a higher IPS generally indicated a better tumor immunotherapy  response 24,25 . /T\_hese are consistent with our results that Cluster 2 had a larger proportion of immunoin/flammatory patients, as well as lower TIDE and higher IPS than Cluster 1. /T\_hen, we divided patients with KIRC into two groups according to the median of the ADME score calculated based on 17 ADME genes and their corresponding coe/fficients from the LASSO algorithm. In the TIME and tumor immunotherapy analysis, the results of the low ADME score group with a better overall prognosis were similar to those of Cluster 2.

Studies on the glycolysis-cholesterol synthesis axis in many  cancers 32-38 , such as prostate cancer, liver cancer, and colorectal cancer, suggested a close relationship between tumor microenvironment and tumor metabolism. Multiple metabolic processes are reprogrammed in renal clear cell carcinoma, especially the well-known Warburg e/ffect, in which tumor cells largely rely on aerobic glycolysis for energy  supply 39 . Here, we found a higher proportion of glycolytic subtypes in the populations with a poor clinical outcome (Cluster 1 and high ADME score group) than in the patients with a better clinical outcome (Cluster 2 and low ADME score group). Moreover, we explored the enrichment of several important oncogenic signaling pathways in di/fferent ADME groups. /T\_he functions of NF-κB and JAK-STAT3 signaling pathways have been demonstrated in  KIRC 40-45 . Both signaling pathways are associated with  in/flammation 46,47 , and in/flammation is present in a variety of tumors, especially advanced-stage renal cell  carcinoma 48-50 . In/flammation environment induced by tumor cells can promote the malignant phenotype of tumor cells, ultimately leading to a poor prognosis for  patients 51 . In addition, it has been shown that p65 and pSTAT3, proteins of key genes in these two signaling pathways, synergistically regulate glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) involved in metabolic reprogramming of  KIRC 52 . /T\_hese /findings may partly explain the di/fferences in TIME and overall survival between di/fferent ADME score groups of KIRC patients.

/T\_his study had several potential limitations that should be acknowledged. First of all, the ADME patterns and ADME score were based on the analysis of retrospective data, which inevitably lead to bias to a certain extent. Hence, there is a necessity for validation in a well-designed prospective clinical trial with di/fferent and larger populations. Additionally, con/firmation of the key ADME genes (such as ALDH4A1 and SLC16A1) and their

/T\_he occurrence and development of renal clear cell carcinoma, as well as the tumor microenvironment, are strongly in/fluenced by single nucleotide variations and CNVs of genes, as well as other events of genomic instability such as DNA repair  defects 5 . /T\_he von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor (VHL) and polybromo 1 (PBRM1), which have a relatively high frequency of mutations in KIRC and are thought to promote the development of KIRC, did not di/ffer in the two ADME score groups. However, BAP1 and SET domain containing 2 (SETD2), which are involved in the maintenance of chromosome stability and considered as tumor  suppressors 53-55 , had a relatively high mutation rate in the high ADME score group, which was associated with a poor prognosis. But only the mutation of BAP1 was linked to an unfavorable outcome in the TCGA cohort. /T\_he relationship between SETD2 mutation and KIRC patients' prognosis may need to be veri/fied in a larger sample size cohort. Additionally, we analyzed the main mutation signatures of the two ADME score groups, and the /findings indicated that the high ADME score group primarily displayed three signatures in the samples: DNA HRD, smoking, and de/ficiency of DNA MMR, whereas patients in low ADME score group displayed DNA HRD. Capitanio et/uni00A0al. have identi/fied that smoking represents a risk factor for  KIRC 56 . DNA HRD and DNA MMR de/ficiency may be caused by mutations in BAP1 and  STED2 57-59 . /T\_hese results were further veri/fied by the calculation of FGA score, aneuploidy score, and HRD score. In conclusion, genomic instability assessed by the above indicators may be responsible for tumor occurrence and progression in KIRC  patients 5 .

Vol:.(1234567890)

associated signaling pathways (such as NF-κB and JAK-STAT3 signaling pathways) within the ADME groups requires experimental validation in the future.

To summarize, based on ADME genes, we have identi/fied two ADME patterns in KIRC. Furthermore, the newly constructed ADME score, which re/flects the ADME patterns of individual patients, is anticipated to enhance our comprehension of the tumor microenvironment and genomic traits, and may prove bene/ficial in devising personalized treatment approaches for KIRC.

## Materials and methods Raw data retrieval and preprocessing

/T\_he clinical information, RNA sequencing data, somatic mutation, and copy number data of the TCGA-KIRC cohort 6 were obtained with the TCGAbiolinks R  package 60 . Two additional kidney renal clear cell carcinoma data sets, including 101 samples of E-MTAB-1980 61 from the ArrayExpress database (https:// www. ebi. ac. uk/ array expre ss/) and 55 samples of  GSE167573 62 from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database (https:// www. ncbi. nlm. nih. gov/ geo/) were downloaded to validate our /findings. Patients who lack survival data or gene expression information from subsequent analysis were excluded. Genes were retained if they were expressed in at least half of the TCGA-KIRC cohort (n = 525). /T\_he 298 ADME  genes 8,63 were procured from the PharmaADME Consortium (http:// www. pharm aadme. org; Supplementary Table/uni00A01).

## Exploring characteristics of ADME genes in KIRC

/T\_he DESeq2 R package was utilized to identify ADME genes that showed di/fferential expression between normal and tumor tissues in the TCGA-KIRC  cohort 64 . ADME genes with a false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.05 and |Log2 fold change |> 2 as thresholds were de/fined as dysregulated genes. To identify ADME genes signi/ficantly associated with OS ( P < 0.05) in TCGA-KIRC, univariate Cox regression analysis was performed a/f\_ter variance stabilizing transformation by using the Survival and DESeq2 packages in R. To determine the overlap between ADME genes that displayed di/fferential expression and those with prognostic signi/ficance, we employed the R package VennDiagram to construct a Venn diagram. /T\_he principal component analysis (PCA) was conducted using the FactoMineR and factoextra packages in R to show these ADME genes' ability of distinguishing between kidney renal clear cell cancer tissue and non-cancer tissue in TCGA-KIRC. /T\_he ma/f\_tools R  package 65 was adopted to delineate the somatic mutations in these genes. /T\_he copy number variation (CNV) status and chromosome information of above genes were generated by GISTIC 2.0  analysis 66 on the GenePattern platform (https:// cloud. genep attern. org/ gp/ pages/ index. jsf), which were displayed in a circos plot.

## Establishment of distinct ADME profiles through unsupervised clustering

Based on 26 di/fferentially expressed and prognostic-related ADME genes expression pro/files, the ConsensusClusterPlus R package was performed for unsupervised clustering using partitioning around medoid (PAM) clustering, based on Euclidean distance using Ward's minimum variance linkage algorithm and 1000  iterations 67 . /T\_he random seed was set as 123,456 for reproducibility. In TCGA-KIRC, the optimal number of  clusters 68 was ascertained automatically using the proportion of ambiguous clustering pairs (PAC) method. PCA and T-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (tSNE) analysis were conducted to further evaluate clustering results using the FactoMineR, factoextra, Rtsne, and  CancerSubtypes 69 packages in R. For the clustering results in three KIRC cohorts, the survminer and survival R packages were utilized for log-rank test and plotting of survival curves.

## Calculating the ADME score and evaluating its clinical significance

/T\_he LASSO method (1000 times) was conducted in the TCGA-KIRC to explore the appropriate gene combinations based on the above 26 ADME genes by glmnet R  package 70 . /T\_he most frequent gene combination (17 genes) was considered to compute the ADME  score 71 . To calculate the ADME score for each KIRC patient in the three cohorts, we used the normalized expression values (Expi, according to centering of genes relative to their cohort median expression values) and regression coe/fficients (Coei) of these genes (listed in Supplementary Table/uni00A03). /T\_he formula for the ADME score was constructed as follows:

<!-- image -->

/T\_he KIRC patients were strati/fied into two groups based on their ADME scores: those with scores above the median were classi/fied as the high ADME score group, while those with scores below the median were classi/fied as the low ADME score group. /T\_he di/fference in overall survival between the low-score and high-score patients was evaluated with Kaplan-Meier survival analysis. Univariate Cox and multivariate Cox analyses were performed to assess the ability of ADME score as an independent prognostic factor in TCGA-KIRC. /T\_he sensitivity and speci/ficity of the ADME score and other clinical parameters were evaluated by the time-dependent receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis. To validate the predictive capability of the ADME score and other clinical features, time-dependent concordance index (C-index) analysis was utilized. /T\_hese analyses were conducted using the survminer, survival,  timeROC 72 , and  pec 73 packages in R.

## Annotation and functional enrichment analyses

Base on annotated gene sets derived from the Molecular Signatures Database (MSigDB) and 49 signi/ficant upregulated or down-regulated ADME genes, we conducted over-representation analysis (ORA), containing Gene Ontology (GO) analysis and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Gnomes (KEGG) pathways enrichment analysis using the clusterPro/filer R  package 74-77 . To examine the relationship between molecular subtypes and biological

Vol.:(0123456789)

processes, we conducted functional enrichment analysis using the gene set variation analysis (GSVA) package in R, with annotated gene sets obtained from the  MSigDB 78 . What's more, a gene set related to the glycolysischolesterol synthesis axis, as described by Schae/ffer et/uni00A0al. 37 was achieved to recognize the glycolipid metabolism subtypes using the R ConsensusClusterPlus  package 67 .

## Evaluation of tumor immune microenvironment ȋTIMEȌ

/T\_he gene expression pro/files of immune-related genes based on previous literature 25,79,80 were analyzed between di/fferent TCGA-KIRC subtypes. In the TCGA-KIRC dataset, the single sample gene set enrichment analysis (ssGSEA) was used to quantitatively assess the enrichment of immunity function-related gene sets which were collected from previous  studies 81 . In parallel, we detected the in/filtration of immune cells in the tumor microenvironment (TME) of the TCGA-KIRC cohort through Cell-type Identi/fication by Estimating Relative Subsets of RNA Transcripts (CIBERSORT) and ssGSEA. /T\_hese analyses were conducted using the  immunedeconv 82 and GSVA 25,78 R packages. Subtypes of  immunity 17 of TCGA-KIRC patients were evaluated by the R ImmuneSubtypeClassi/fier package.

## Whole-genome data analysis

/T\_he number of copy segments, copy number percentage, and gistic scores of each TCGA-KIRC patient were generated from GISTIC 2.0  analysis 66 . /T\_he CNV states and copy number burden of each TCGA-KIRC sample were computed based on the gene level results generated on GISTIC 2.0  analysis 66,87,88 . Fraction of genome altered (FGA), fraction of genome gained (FGG), and fraction of genome lost (FGL) of TCGA-KIRC patients were calculated according to a previous reported  method 89 . Moreover, aneuploidy scores of TCGA-KIRC were obtained from research of Shmulevich et/uni00A0al. 17 , and Homologous Recombination Defects (HRD) 90-93 of TCGA-KIRC were obtained from the UCSC Xena browser (http:// xena. ucsc. edu/). /T\_hese indicators were used to describe CNV landscape in the TCGA-KIRC cohort.

Genes with high mutation frequencies in TCGA-KIRC were represented using the ma/f\_tools R  package 65 . Di/fferentially mutated genes among the TCGA-KIRC subtypes were de/fined by a signi/ficance threshold at P < 0.05. To identify main mutation signatures in di/fferent KIRC subtypes, We employed non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) to reduce the dimension of the mutation matrix in the TCGA-KIRC  cohort 83 . /T\_he mutation signatures identi/fied by NMF were further compared with thirty tumor somatic mutational signatures which have been reported in the Catalogue of Somatic Mutations In Cancer (COSMIC, https:// cancer. sanger. ac. uk/ cosmic) 84 and /finally the main mutational signatures of KIRC were determined. /T\_he above processes were conducted using the NMF 85 , MutationalPatterns 86 , and BSgenome packages in R.

## Immunotherapy and chemotherapy response analysis

/T\_he tumor immune dysfunction and exclusion (TIDE) algorithm, which integrates the two mechanisms of tumor immune evasion (T cell dysfunction and T cell exclusion), can simulate tumor immune escape and predict the potential response to tumor  immunotherapy 24 . /T\_he TIDE scores for each TCGA-KIRC sample were computed based on TCGA-KIRC mRNA expression matrix (utilizing the all-sample average as the normalization control) using the TIDE website (http:// tide. dfci. harva rd. edu/). Immunophenoscore (IPS), an index for re/flecting tumor immunogenicity and sensitivity to immune checkpoint inhibitor, was calculated according to Charoentong et/uni00A0al. 25 . For chemotherapy response analysis, we downloaded and processed the drug sensitivity data from the Cancer /T\_herapeutics Response Portal (CTRP v.2.0, https:// porta ls. broad insti tute. org/ ctrp) 94 and PRISM Repurposing dataset (19Q4, https:// depmap. org/ portal/ prism/) 95 based on previous  literature 96 . /T\_he expression data for the corresponding human cancer cell lines were derived from the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE) (https:// porta ls. broad insti tute. org/ ccle/) 97 . /T\_he chemotherapy response of each TCGA-KIRC sample was predicted by the oncoPredict R  package 98 using the above data.

## Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction ȋqRT-PCRȌ

/T\_he mRNA expression of ADME key genes we were interested in was validated in the normal renal cell line (HK2) and two renal cancer cell lines (786O and 769P). Total RNA was extracted using the MolPure® Cell/Tissue Total RNA Kit (Yeasen, 19221ES50). PCR ampli/fication was conducted using the QuantStudio® 3 Real-Time PCR System (/T\_hermoFisher Scienti/fic). /T\_he following primer pairs were utilized for qRT-PCR: solute carrier family 22 member 6 (SLC22A6)-forward 5 ' -3 ' CAT CTT GAA CTA CCT GCA GAC  and  SLC22A6-reverse  5 ' -3 ' TTC AGT GTC ATG CAG TTG AGG, aldehyde dehydrogenase 4 family member A1 (ALDH4A1)-forward 5 ' -3 ' CCC CCA ACA TCA TCC AGT TT  and  ALDH4A1-reverse  5 ' -3 ' CAG GTG TTT GAA GGT GGG CA,  solute  carrier  family  13 member 2 (SLC13A2)-forward 5 ' -3 ' ACG GCC TTC CTG TCC ATG TG  and  SLC13A2-reverse  5 ' -3 ' TGG AGC TCG AAG GTG GGG TT, aldehyde dehydrogenase 6 family member A1 (ALDH6A1)-forward 5 ' -3 ' TGG GAC TGG ATT TCA CCT TG  and  ALDH6A1-reverse  5 ' -3 ' GTG CTT CTG GGC AGT AGA GG,  dehydrogenase  reductase 9 (DHRS9)-forward 5 ' -3 ' TTC CTT TGG CTG CTG ACA GG  and  DHRS9-reverse  5 ' -3 ' ATT AGG AGG CCT AGC ACC CA, SLC16A1-forward 5 ' -3 ' TTA AGG CGG CCC TGT TGA GA  and  SLC16A1-reverse  5 ' -3 ' TCC AAT TAC CAC TGC CCA GC.

## Statistical analysis

All statistical analyses were carried out using R versions 4.2.1 and the XianTao platform (https:// www. xiant ao. love/). We used independent Student's t -tests to compare normally distributed continuous variables between two groups, and Wilcoxon rank sum tests for non-normally distributed continuous variables between two groups. For categorical variables, we conducted Chi-square tests or Fisher's exact tests to compare between two groups.

Vol:.(1234567890)

Correlation analysis was performed by Pearson test. A two-sided P < 0.05 value was regarded as the threshold for statistical signi/ficance.

## Data availability

/T\_he datasets generated and/or analyzed during the current study are available in the /T\_he Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA, https:// www. cancer. gov/ tcga) projects (TCGA-KIRC), ArrayExpress database (https:// www. ebi. ac. uk/ array expre ss/) (E-MTAB-1980), Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database (https:// www. ncbi. nlm. nih. gov/ geo/) (GSE167573) and Supplementary Material (Supplementary Tables/uni00A04-6).

Received: 17 February 2024; Accepted: 11 July 2024

## References

- 2.  Sung, H. et al. Global cancer statistics 2020: GLOBOCAN estimates of incidence and mortality worldwide for 36 cancers in 185 countries. CA Cancer J. Clin. 71 , 209-249. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3322/ caac. 21660 (2021).
- 1.  Jonasch, E., Gao, J. & Rathmell, W. K. Renal cell carcinoma. BMJ 349 , 14797. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1136/ bmj. g4797 (2014).
- 3.  Hsieh, J. J. et al. Renal cell carcinoma. Nat. Rev. Dis. Primers 3 , 17009. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ nrdp. 2017.9 (2017).
- 5.  Jonasch, E., Walker, C. L. & Rathmell, W. K. Clear cell renal cell carcinoma ontogeny and mechanisms of lethality. Nat. Rev. Nephrol. 17 , 245-261. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ s41581- 020- 00359-2 (2021).
- 4.  Turajlic, S., Swanton, C. & Bosho/ff, C. Kidney cancer: /T\_he next decade. J Exp Med 215 , 2477-2479. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1084/ jem. 20181 617 (2018).
- 6.  Hutter, C. & Zenklusen, J. C. /T\_he cancer genome atlas: creating lasting value beyond its data. Cell 173 , 283-285. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. cell. 2018. 03. 042 (2018).
- 8.  Hu, D. G., Marri, S., McKinnon, R. A., Mackenzie, P. I. & Meech, R. Deregulation of the genes that are involved in drug absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion in hepatocellular carcinoma. J. Pharmacol. Exp. /T\_her. 368 , 363-381. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1124/ jpet. 118. 255018 (2019).
- 7.  Grossman, I. ADME pharmacogenetics: current practices and future outlook. Expert Opin. Drug Metab. Toxicol. 5 , 449-462. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1517/ 17425 25090 29023 22 (2009).
- 9.  Rosenthal, S. B., Bush, K. T. & Nigam, S. K. A network of SLC and ABC transporter and DME genes involved in remote sensing and signaling in the gut-liver-kidney axis. Sci Rep 9 , 11879. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ s41598- 019- 47798-x (2019).
- 11.  Drozdzik, M. & Oswald, S. Expression and regulation of drug transporters and metabolizing enzymes in the human gastrointestinal tract. Curr. Med. Chem. 23 , 4468-4489. https:// doi. org/ 10. 2174/ 09298 67323 66616 10241 54457 (2016).
- 10.  Fisel, P., Schae/ffeler, E. & Schwab, M. DNA methylation of ADME genes. Clin. Pharmacol. /T\_her. 99 , 512-527. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ cpt. 343 (2016).
- 12.  Huang, J. F. et al. Overexpression of ABCB4 contributes to acquired doxorubicin resistance in breast cancer cells in/uni00A0vitro. Cancer Chemother. Pharmacol. 82 , 199-210. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s00280- 018- 3603-y (2018).
- 14.  Cheng, S. Y. et al. Glutathione S-transferase M3 is associated with glycolysis in intrinsic temozolomide-resistant glioblastoma multiforme cells. Int. J. Mol. Sci. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3390/ ijms2 21370 80 (2021).
- 13.  Matheux, A. et al. PXR modulates the prostate cancer cell response to afatinib by regulating the expression of the monocarboxylate transporter SLC16A1. Cancers (Basel) https:// doi. org/ 10. 3390/ cance rs131 43635 (2021).
- 15.  Hu, D. G., Mackenzie, P. I., Nair, P. C., McKinnon, R. A. & Meech, R. /T\_he expression pro/files of ADME genes in human cancers and their associations with clinical outcomes. Cancers (Basel) https:// doi. org/ 10. 3390/ cance rs121 13369 (2020).
- 17.  /T\_horsson,  V. et al. /T\_he immune landscape of cancer. Immunity 48 , 812-830 e814. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. immuni. 2018. 03. 023 (2018).
- 16.  Zhang,  G. et al. DPEP1 inhibits tumor cell invasiveness, enhances chemosensitivity and predicts clinical outcome in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. PLoS One 7 , e31507. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1371/ journ al. pone. 00315 07 (2012).
- 18.  Wang, S. M., Sun, Z. Q., Li, H. Y., Wang, J. & Liu, Q. Y. Temporal identi/fication of dysregulated genes and pathways in clear cell renal cell carcinoma based on systematic tracking of disrupted modules. Comput. Math. Methods Med. 2015 , 313740. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1155/ 2015/ 313740 (2015).
- 20.  Lu,  J. et al. ABAT and ALDH6A1, regulated by transcription factor HNF4A, suppress tumorigenic capability in clear cell renal cell carcinoma. J. Transl. Med. 18 , 101. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1186/ s12967- 020- 02268-1 (2020).
- 19.  Zou, X. & Mo, Z. CYP2J2 is a diagnostic and prognostic biomarker associated with immune in/filtration in kidney renal clear cell carcinoma. Biomed. Res. Int. 2021 , 3771866. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1155/ 2021/ 37718 66 (2021).
- 21.  Hinshaw, D. C. & Shevde, L. A. /T\_he tumor microenvironment innately modulates cancer progression. Cancer Res. 79 , 4557-4566. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1158/ 0008- 5472. CAN- 18- 3962 (2019).
- 23.  Chen, D. S. & Mellman, I. Elements of cancer immunity and the cancer-immune set point. Nature 541 , 321-330. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ natur e21349 (2017).
- 22.  Pitt, J. M. et al. Targeting the tumor microenvironment: removing obstruction to anticancer immune responses and immunotherapy. Ann. Oncol. 27 , 1482-1492. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1093/ annonc/ mdw168 (2016).
- 24.  Jiang,  P. et al. Signatures of T cell dysfunction and exclusion predict cancer immunotherapy response. Nat. Med. 24 , 1550-1558. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ s41591- 018- 0136-1 (2018).
- 26.  Muzio, G., Maggiora, M., Paiuzzi, E., Oraldi, M. & Canuto, R. A. Aldehyde dehydrogenases and cell proliferation. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 52 , 735-746. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. freer adbio med. 2011. 11. 033 (2012).
- 25.  Charoentong,  P. et al. Pan-cancer immunogenomic analyses reveal genotype-immunophenotype relationships and predictors of response to checkpoint blockade. Cell Rep 18 , 248-262. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. celrep. 2016. 12. 019 (2017).
- 27.  Peng, X., Zheng, T., Guo, Y. & Zhu, Y. Amino acid metabolism genes associated with immunotherapy responses and clinical prognosis of colorectal cancer. Front Mol. Biosci. 9 , 955705. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3389/ fmolb. 2022. 955705 (2022).
- 29.  Li, K. K. et al. miR-124 is frequently down-regulated in medulloblastoma and is a negative regulator of SLC16A1. Hum. Pathol. 40 , 1234-1243. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. humpa th. 2009. 02. 003 (2009).
- 28.  Morioka, S. et al. E/fferocytosis induces a novel SLC program to promote glucose uptake and lactate release. Nature 563 , 714-718. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ s41586- 018- 0735-5 (2018).
- 30.  Matheux, A. et al. PXR modulates the prostate cancer cell response to afatinib by regulating the expression of the monocarboxylate transporter SLC16A1. Cancers (Basel) https:// doi. org/ 10. 3390/ cance rs131 43635 (2021).
- 32.  Zhong, P. C. et al. Altered gene expression in glycolysis-cholesterol synthesis axis correlates with outcome of triple-negative breast cancer. Exp. Biol. Med. (Maywood) 246 , 560-571. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 15353 70220 975206 (2021).
- 31.  You,  S. et al. Construction of SLC16A1/3 targeted gallic acid-iron-embelin nanoparticles for regulating glycolysis and redox pathways in cervical cancer. Mol. Pharm. 20 , 4574-4586. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1021/ acs. molph armac eut. 3c002 94 (2023).

Vol.:(0123456789)

- 33.  Wang, G., Liu, X., Wang, D., Sun, M. & Yang, Q. Identi/fication and development of subtypes with poor prognosis in pan-gynecological cancer based on gene expression in the glycolysis-cholesterol synthesis axis. Front. Oncol. 11 , 636565. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3389/ fonc. 2021. 636565 (2021).
- 35.  Chen, Y. J. et al. Interaction between glycolysis-cholesterol synthesis axis and tumor microenvironment reveal that gamma-glutamyl hydrolase suppresses glycolysis in colon cancer. Front Immunol. 13 , 979521. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3389/ /fimmu. 2022. 979521 (2022).
- 34.  Zhang,  E. et al. Identi/fication of subgroups along the glycolysis-cholesterol synthesis axis and the development of an associated prognostic risk model. Hum. Genomics 15 , 53. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1186/ s40246- 021- 00350-3 (2021).
- 36.  Deng, W., Zhu, P., Xu, H., Hou, X. & Chen, W. Classi/fication and prognostic characteristics of hepatocellular carcinoma based on glycolysis cholesterol synthesis axis. J. Oncol. 2022 , 2014625. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1155/ 2022/ 20146 25 (2022).
- 38.  Yuan, Y., Song, J. & Wu, Q. Aberrant gene expression pattern in the glycolysis-cholesterol synthesis axis is linked with immune in/filtration and prognosis in prostate cancer: A bioinformatics analysis. Medicine (Baltimore) 101 , e31416. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1097/ MD. 00000 00000 031416 (2022).
- 37.  Karasinska, J. M. et al. Altered gene expression along the glycolysis-cholesterol synthesis axis is associated with outcome in pancreatic cancer. Clin. Cancer Res. 26 , 135-146. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1158/ 1078- 0432. CCR- 19- 1543 (2020).
- 39.  Wettersten, H. I., Aboud, O. A., Lara, P. N. Jr. & Weiss, R. H. Metabolic reprogramming in clear cell renal cell carcinoma. Nat. Rev. Nephrol. 13 , 410-419. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ nrneph. 2017. 59 (2017).
- 41.  Chen, Y. C., Hsieh, C. L., Huang, B. M. & Chen, Y. C. Induction of mitochondrial-dependent apoptosis by essential oil of Toona sinensis root through Akt, mTOR and NF-kappaB signalling pathways in human renal cell carcinoma cells. J. Food Drug Anal. 29 , 433-447. https:// doi. org/ 10. 38212/ 2224- 6614. 3367 (2021).
- 40.  Matsukawa,  T. et al. ANGPTL8 links in/flammation and poor di/fferentiation, which are characteristics of malignant renal cell carcinoma. Cancer Sci. 114 , 1410-1422. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ cas. 15700 (2023).
- 42.  Luebke,  T. et al. c-FLIP and CD95 signaling are essential for survival of renal cell carcinoma. Cell Death Dis. 10 , 384. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ s41419- 019- 1609-y (2019).
- 44.  Li,  S. et al. Icaritin inhibits JAK/STAT3 signaling and growth of renal cell carcinoma. PLoS One 8 , 181657. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1371/ journ al. pone. 00816 57 (2013).
- 43.  Liu,  W. et al. OTUD1 stabilizes PTEN to inhibit the PI3K/AKT and TNF-alpha/NF-kappaB signaling pathways and sensitize ccRCC to TKIs. Int. J. Biol. Sci. 18 , 1401-1414. https:// doi. org/ 10. 7150/ ijbs. 68980 (2022).
- 45.  Xiao,  C. et al. RNF7 inhibits apoptosis and sunitinib sensitivity and promotes glycolysis in renal cell carcinoma via the SOCS1/ JAK/STAT3 feedback loop. Cell Mol. Biol. Lett. 27 , 36. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1186/ s11658- 022- 00337- 55 (2022).
- 47.  Yu, H., Lee, H., Herrmann, A., Buettner, R. & Jove, R. Revisiting STAT3 signalling in cancer: new and unexpected biological functions. Nat. Rev. Cancer 14 , 736-746. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ nrc38 18 (2014).
- 46.  Hoesel, B. & Schmid, J. A. /T\_he complexity of NF-kappaB signaling in in/flammation and cancer. Mol. Cancer 12 , 86. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1186/ 1476- 4598- 12- 86 (2013).
- 48.  Chang, Y. et al. Systemic in/flammation score predicts postoperative prognosis of patients with clear-cell renal cell carcinoma. Br. J. Cancer 113 , 626-633. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ bjc. 2015. 241 (2015).
- 50.  Hu, Q. et al. /T\_he prognostic value of C-reactive protein in renal cell carcinoma: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Urol. Oncol. 32 (50), 151-158. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. urolo nc. 2013. 07. 016 (2014).
- 49.  Hu,  H. et al. Prognostic value of preoperative NLR, dNLR, PLR and CRP in surgical renal cell carcinoma patients. World J. Urol. 35 , 261-270. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s00345- 016- 1864-9 (2017).
- 51.  Marozzi,  M. et al. In/flammation, extracellular matrix remodeling, and proteostasis in tumor microenvironment. Int. J. Mol. Sci. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3390/ ijms2 21581 02 (2021).
- 53.  Peng, J. et al. Stabilization of MCRS1 by BAP1 prevents chromosome instability in renal cell carcinoma. Cancer Lett. 369 , 167-174. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. canlet. 2015. 08. 013 (2015).
- 52.  Zhang,  Q. et al. NF-kappaB and pSTAT3 synergistically drive G6PD overexpression and facilitate sensitivity to G6PD inhibition in ccRCC. Cancer Cell Int. 20 , 483. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1186/ s12935- 020- 01576-2 (2010).
- 54.  Pena-Llopis,  S. et al. BAP1 loss de/fines a new class of renal cell carcinoma. Nat. Genet. 44 , 751-759. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ ng. 2323 (2012).
- 56.  Capitanio,  U. et al. Epidemiology of renal cell carcinoma. Eur. Urol. 75 , 74-84. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. eururo. 2018. 08. 0365 (2019).
- 55.  Dalgliesh, G. L. et al. Systematic sequencing of renal carcinoma reveals inactivation of histone modifying genes. Nature 463 , 360-363. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ natur e08672 (2010).
- 57.  Ismail, I. H. et al. Germline mutations in BAP1 impair its function in DNA double-strand break repair. Cancer Res. 74 , 4282-4294. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1158/ 0008- 5472. CAN- 13- 3109r (2014).
- 59.  Li,  F. et al. /T\_he histone mark H3K36me3 regulates human DNA mismatch repair through its interaction with MutSalpha. Cell 153 , 590-600. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. cell. 2013. 03. 025 (2013).
- 58.  Carvalho, S. et al. SETD2 is required for DNA double-strand break repair and activation of the p53-mediated checkpoint. Elife 3 , e02482. https:// doi. org/ 10. 7554/ eLife. 02482 (2014).
- 60.  Colaprico,  A. et al. TCGAbiolinks: An R/Bioconductor package for integrative analysis of TCGA data. Nucl. Acids Res. 44 , 171. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1093/ nar/ gkv15 07 (2016).
- 62.  Sun, G. et al. Integrated exome and RNA sequencing of TFE3-translocation renal cell carcinoma. Nat. Commun. 12 , 5262. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ s41467- 021- 25618-z (2021).
- 61.  Sato,  Y. et al. Integrated molecular analysis of clear-cell renal cell carcinoma. Nat. Genet. 45 , 860-867. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ ng. 2699 (2013).
- 63.  Hovelson, D. H. et al. Characterization of ADME gene variation in 21 populations by exome sequencing. Pharmacogenet. Genomics
- 64.  Love, M. I., Huber, W. & Anders, S. Moderated estimation of fold change and dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2. Genome Biol. 15 , 550. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1186/ s13059- 014- 0550-8 (2014).
- 27 , 89-100. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1097/ FPC. 00000 00000 000260 (2017).
- 65.  Mayakonda, A., Lin, D. C., Assenov, Y., Plass, C. & Koe/ffler, H. P. Ma/f\_tools: E/fficient and comprehensive analysis of somatic variants in cancer. Genome Res. 28 , 1747-1756. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1101/ gr. 239244. 118 (2018).
- 67.  Wilkerson, M. D. & Hayes, D. N. ConsensusClusterPlus: A class discovery tool with con/fidence assessments and item tracking. Bioinformatics 26 , 1572-1573. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1093/ bioin forma tics/ btq170 (2010).
- 66.  Mermel, C. H. et al. GISTIC2.0 facilitates sensitive and con/fident localization of the targets of focal somatic copy-number alteration in human cancers. Genome Biol. 12 , 141. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1186/ gb- 2011- 12-4- r41 (2011).
- 68.  Archer, T. C. et al. Proteomics, post-translational modi/fications, and integrative analyses reveal molecular heterogeneity within medulloblastoma subgroups. Cancer Cell 34 , 396-410 e398. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ccell. 2018. 08. 004 (2018).
- 70.  Friedman, J., Hastie, T. & Tibshirani, R. Regularization paths for generalized linear models via coordinate descent. J. Stat. So/f\_tw. 33 , 1-22 (2010).
- 69.  Xu, T. et al. CancerSubtypes: An R/Bioconductor package for molecular cancer subtype identi/fication, validation and visualization. Bioinformatics 33 , 3131-3133. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1093/ bioin forma tics/ btx378 (2017).

Vol:.(1234567890)

- 71.  Wang, J. et al. A novel immune-related lncRNA pair signature for prognostic prediction and immune response evaluation in gastric cancer: a bioinformatics and biological validation study. Cancer Cell Int. 22 , 69. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1186/ s12935- 022- 02493- 25 (2022).
- 73.  Mogensen, U. B., Ishwaran, H. & Gerds, T. A. Evaluating random forests for survival analysis using prediction error curves. J. Stat. So/f\_tw. 50 , 1-23. https:// doi. org/ 10. 18637/ jss. v050. i11 (2012).
- 72.  Blanche, P., Dartigues, J. F. & Jacqmin-Gadda, H. Estimating and comparing time-dependent areas under receiver operating characteristic curves for censored event times with competing risks. Stat. Med. 32 , 5381-5397. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ sim. 5958 (2013).
- 74.  Kanehisa, M., Furumichi, M., Sato, Y., Kawashima, M. & Ishiguro-Watanabe, M. KEGG for taxonomy-based analysis of pathways and genomes. Nucl. Acids Res 51 , D587-D592. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1093/ nar/ gkac9 63 (2023).
- 10. 1002/ pro. 3715 (2019).
- 75.  Kanehisa, M. Toward understanding the origin and evolution of cellular organisms. Protein Sci. 28 , 1947-1951. https:// doi. org/
- 76.  Kanehisa, M. & Goto, S. KEGG: Kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes. Nucl. Acids Res 28 , 27-30. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1093/ nar/ 28.1. 27 (2000).
- 78.  Hanzelmann, S., Castelo, R. & Guinney, J. GSVA: Gene set variation analysis for microarray and RNA-seq data. BMC Bioinform. 14 , 7. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1186/ 1471- 2105- 14-7 (2013).
- 77.  Yu, G., Wang, L. G., Han, Y. & He, Q. Y. clusterPro/filer: An R package for comparing biological themes among gene clusters. OMICS 16 , 284-287. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1089/ omi. 2011. 0118 (2010).
- 79.  Lauss,  M. et al. Mutational and putative neoantigen load predict clinical bene/fit of adoptive T cell therapy in melanoma. Nat. Commun. 8 , 1738. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ s41467- 017- 01460-0 (2017).
- 81.  Mariathasan, S. et al. TGFbeta attenuates tumour response to PD-L1 blockade by contributing to exclusion of T cells. Nature 554 , 544-548. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ natur e25501 (2018).
- 80.  Chen, P. L. et al. Analysis of immune signatures in longitudinal tumor samples yields insight into biomarkers of response and mechanisms of resistance to immune checkpoint blockade. Cancer Discov. 6 , 827-837. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1158/ 2159- 8290. CD15- 1545 (2016).
- 82.  Sturm, G., Finotello, F. & List, M. Immunedeconv: An R package for uni/fied access to computational methods for estimating immune cell fractions from bulk RNA-sequencing data. Methods Mol. Biol. 2120 , 223-232. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 978-1- 07160327-7\_ 16 (2020).
- 84.  Alexandrov, L. B. et al. Signatures of mutational processes in human cancer. Nature 500 , 415-421. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ natur e12477 (2013).
- 83.  Kim, J. et al. Invasive bladder cancer: Genomic insights and therapeutic promise. Clin. Cancer Res 21 , 4514-4524. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1158/ 1078- 0432. CCR- 14- 1215 (2015).
- 85.  Gaujoux, R. & Seoighe, C. A /flexible R package for nonnegative matrix factorization. BMC Bioinform. 11 , 367. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1186/ 1471- 2105- 11- 367 (2010).
- 87.  Lee, W. C. et al. Multiomics pro/filing of primary lung cancers and distant metastases reveals immunosuppression as a common characteristic of tumor cells with metastatic plasticity. Genome Biol. 21 , 271. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1186/ s13059- 020- 02175-0 (2020).
- 86.  Manders,  F. et al. MutationalPatterns: /T\_he one stop shop for the analysis of mutational processes. BMC Genom. 23 , 134. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1186/ s12864- 022- 08357-3 (2022).
- 88.  Ye,  Z. et al. Prevalent homozygous deletions of type I interferon and defensin genes in human cancers associate with immunotherapy resistance. Clin. Cancer Res. 24 , 3299-3308. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1158/ 1078- 0432. CCR- 17- 3008 (2018).
- 90.  Abkevich, V. et al. Patterns of genomic loss of heterozygosity predict homologous recombination repair defects in epithelial ovarian cancer. Br. J. Cancer 107 , 1776-1782. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ bjc. 2012. 451 (2012).
- 89.  Sinha, R. et al. Analysis of renal cancer cell lines from two major resources enables genomics-guided cell line selection. Nat. Commun. 8 , 15165. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ ncomm s15165 (2017).
- 91.  Popova, T. et al. Ploidy and large-scale genomic instability consistently identify basal-like breast carcinomas with BRCA1/2 inactivation. Cancer Res. 72 , 5454-5462. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1158/ 0008- 5472. CAN- 12- 1470 (2012).
- 93.  Marquard, A. M. et al. Pan-cancer analysis of genomic scar signatures associated with homologous recombination de/ficiency
- 92.  Birkbak, N. J. et al. Telomeric allelic imbalance indicates defective DNA repair and sensitivity to DNA-damaging agents. Cancer Discov. 2 , 366-375. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1158/ 2159- 8290. CD- 11- 0206 (2012).
- suggests novel indications for existing cancer drugs. Biomark Res. 3 , 9. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1186/ s40364- 015- 0033-4 (2015).
- 95.  Yu,  C. et al. High-throughput identi/fication of genotype-speci/fic cancer vulnerabilities in mixtures of barcoded tumor cell lines. Nat. Biotechnol. 34 , 419-423. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ nbt. 3460 (2016).
- 94.  Rees, M. G. et al. Correlating chemical sensitivity and basal gene expression reveals mechanism of action. Nat. Chem. Biol. 12 , 109-116. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ nchem bio. 1986 (2016).
- 96.  Yang,  C. et al. Prognosis and personalized treatment prediction in TP53-mutant hepatocellular carcinoma: An in silico strategy towards precision oncology. Brief Bioinform. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1093/ bib/ bbaa1 64 (2021).
- 98.  Maeser, D., Gruener, R. F. & Huang, R. S. Oncopredict: an R package for predicting in/uni00A0vivo or cancer patient drug response and biomarkers from cell line screening data. Brief Bioinform https:// doi. org/ 10. 1093/ bib/ bbab2 60 (2021).
- 97.  Ghandi,  M. et al. Next-generation characterization of the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia. Nature 569 , 503-508. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ s41586- 019- 1186-3 (2019).

## Acknowledgements

We acknowledge TCGA, ArrayExpress, GEO, CTRP, PRISM, and CCLE databases for their generous provision of platforms and researchers who contributed their datasets.

## Author contributions

H.Y.Z., W.S.H. and M.T.C contributed to design, collection, analysis, and description of data. B.Y., S.Z.M. and W.D.J. were involved in data acquisition and organization. H.Y.Z., W.S.H. and Y.H.L performed the analysis and wrote the paper. H.B.M. revised the manuscript critically and supervised the study. All authors discussed and revised the manuscript, ultimately reviewing and approving the /final submitted version.

## Funding

/T\_he funding for this study was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 82272961), the Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong Province, China (No. 2022A1515011353), Shenzhen Science and Technology Innovation Program (No. JCYJ20220530150814033),/uni00A0Sanming Project of Medicine in Shenzhen (No. SZSM202111007), Shenzhen Key Medical Discipline Construction Fund (No. SZXK020), and Shenzhen High-level Hospital Construction Fund.

Vol.:(0123456789)

## Competing interests

/T\_he authors declare no competing interests.

## Additional information

Supplementary Information /T\_he online version contains supplementary material available at https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ s41598- 024- 67516-6.

Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to H.M.

Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.

Publisher's note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional a/ffiliations.

<!-- image -->

Open Access /T\_his article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-

NoDerivatives  4.0  International  License,  which  permits  any  non-commercial  use,  sharing, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modi/fied the licensed material. You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. /T\_he images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http:// creat iveco mmons. org/ licen ses/ by- nc- nd/4. 0/.

© /T\_he Author(s) 2024

Vol:.(1234567890)